Student Textbook
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia
Ministry of Education
Biology
Grade 10
Student Textbook
Grade 10
                                                                                                                                                      
ISBN                     
Price
NewNew
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia
Ministry of Education
FDRE
MOE
Biology
Biology          Student Textbook          Grade 10 Biology
Student Textbook
FDRE Ministry of EducationGrade 10
Writers : Beyene Dobo, Ph.D.
        Hawassa University
          Girma Tilahun, Ph.D.
        Hawassa University
Editors:  Kedir Woliy, Ph.D. ( Content Editor )                          
                      Hawassa University
      Girma Moti, MA  ( Curriculum Editor)            
                      Hawasa University 
                    Temesgen Daniel, Ph.D. ( Language Editor )                                     
        Hawassa University
Illustrator: Simachew Ayenew, MSc.
             Bahir Dar University 
Designer: Tesfamichael Getu, Ph.D.
            Bahir Dar UniversityFirst Published xxxxx 2022 by the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia, Ministry of Education, under the General Education 
Quality Improvement Program for Equity (GEQIP-E) supported by the World Bank, UK’s Department for International Develop -
ment/DFID-now merged with the Foreign, Common wealth and Development Office/FCDO, Finland Ministry for Foreign Affairs, 
the Royal Norwegian Embassy, United Nations Children’s Fund/UNICEF), the Global Partnership for Education (GPE), and Danish 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs, through a Multi Donor Trust Fund.   
© 2022 by the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia, Ministry of Education. All rights reserved. 
The moral rights of the author have been asserted. No part of this textbook reproduced, copied in a retrieval system or transmitted 
in any form or by any means including electronic, mechanical, magnetic, photocopying, recording or otherwise, without the prior 
written permission of the Ministry of Education or licensing in accordance with the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia as 
expressed in the Federal Negarit Gazeta, Proclamation No. 410/2004 - Copyright and Neighboring Rights Protection.
The Ministry of Education wishes to thank the many individuals, groups and other bodies involved – directly or indirectly – in pub -
lishing this Textbook. Special thanks are due to Hawassa University for their huge contribution in the development of this textbook 
in collaboration with Addis Ababa University, Bahir Dar University and Jimma University.
Copyrighted materials used by permission of their owners. If you are the owner of copyrighted material not cited or improperly 
cited, please contact the Ministry of Education, Head Office, Arat Kilo, (P.O.Box 1367), Addis Ababa Ethiopia. 
Photo credit: coverage, p. 1, p.17, p.50, p.81, p.94, p.153 Unsplash, 2022 
Printed by:
xxxxxxxx PRINTING 
P.O.Box xxxxxx
xxxxxxx, ETHIOPIA
Under Ministry of Education Contract no. xxxxxxxxxxx
ISBN: XXXXXXXXXXXX
Hawassa UniversityContents
Unit 1: Sub-Fields of Biology....................1
Unit 2: Plants...............................................17
Unit 3: Biochemical Molecules..............50
Unit 4: Cell Division.................................81 
Unit 5: Human Biology.............................94 
Unit 6: Ecological Interactions.............153  
                                                
Contents Learning competencies
1.1. Sub-fields of biology
1.2. Pure and applied fields of biology 
1.3. Major discoveries in Biology
1.4.  The contributions of biological discoveries 
to society and the environment (e.g. micro -
scope, penicillin, inheritance, etc.)
1.5.  Major discoveries by Ethiopian Biologists 
(e.g. Aklilu Lemma, Gabissa Ejeta)• list the Sub-fields of biology 
• classify the different Sub-fields of Biology into pure 
and applied
• discuss at least five major discoveries that revolu -
tionized Biology
• appreciate the contribution of biological discover -
ies to society/environment e.g. microscope, peni -
cillin, inheritance, etc.
• appreciate Ethiopian scientists and their discover -
ies
1.1 Sub-fields of Biology
The scope of biology is so broad that it contains many branches and 
sub-disciplines. In this unit, thus, you will study the sub-fields of 
biology. Based on the type of organism it studies, biology is subdivided 
into three: Zoology, Botany, and Microbiology. In addition to these 
three sub-fields, there is a huge array of sub-disciplines or fields of 
biology. Many have been around for hundreds of years whilst others 
are far newer and are often developing very rapidly. The three major 
sub-divisions and their area of concern are described in the next page. You have defined the term 
‘biology’ in grade nine unit 
1, and briefly discussed what 
biology studies about. In 
this unit, you will study the 
different sub-field of biology.
 At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
•	List	the	sub-fields	of	biology
•	Define	the	sub-fields	of	biologyObjectives Recall
        Unit 1: Sub-fields of Biology                                               
           Which sub-fields of biology do you know? 
1
Grade 10 Biology Zoology
Animal biology, also known as zoology, is the study of animals and 
includes disciplines such as herpetology (reptiles), ichthyology (fish), 
mammalogy (mammals), ornithology (birds), and entomology 
(insects). Zoology is concerned with all aspects of animal life, such 
as embryonic development to mature adulthood; behavior, such as 
interactions with other animals or food finding; and genetics. Figure 
1.1 showes one of the endemic wild animals of Ethiopia. 
Botany
Botany is a field of biology that studies about plants. It deals with plants’ 
structure, properties, and biochemical processes. It also studies about 
classification and diseases of plants and their interactions with the 
environment. The principles and findings of botany have provided 
the base for such applied sciences as agriculture, horticulture, and 
forestry.
Plants have long been used as a source of food, shelter, clothing, 
medicine, ornament, and tools. Green plants are now known to be 
essential to all life on earth. In addition to their practical and economic 
values, through the process of photosynthesis, plants convert energy 
from the Sun into the chemical energy of food, which allows all 
life to exist. The formation and release of oxygen as a byproduct of 
photosynthesis is the second unique and important capability of 
green plants. Ruta chalepensis L. (‘Tena Adam’ in Amharic), a known 
traditional herbal medicine of Ethiopia, is shown as an example  (see 
Fig 1.2).
Microbiology
Microbiology is the study of microscopic organisms or microbes 
that cannot be seen by unaided eye. It includes bacteria, archaea, 
protists, viruses, microscopic algae and fungi. This branch of biology 
is further subdivided into sub-disciplines, which are frequently 
defined by specific microbes. Bacteriology, for example, is the study 
of bacteria, whereas mycology is the study of fungi. The majority of 
bacteria and other microbial species have yet to be identified due to Make a group of three students and write down the names of 
organisms you know that would be categorized under the three 
major divisions of biology. Share with other groups what you have 
written and compare with yours. Activity 1.1: THINK-PAIR-SHARE
Figure 1.1  Capra walie 
(Waliya ibex) (in Simien 
Mountains of Ethiopia)
Figure1.2 Ruta chalepensis L. 
(Tena Adam)
Figure 1.3. The microorganismsMicroor -
ganism or 
microbes
  bacteria
viruses
fungi
algae
protozoa
archea
2
Grade 10 Biology Unit One: Sub-fields of Biologythe difficulty of isolating a single microscopic species. Microbiology 
is a rapidly expanding field of study; however, new technology and 
developments in the field are constantly assisting in the identification 
of new species. Activity 1.2 below will help you study the different 
types of microorganisms independently.
Table 1.1 shows how various branches of biology are related to the 
structure we are studying. Anatomy, for example, is a branch of 
biology that studies the physical structures and parts of organisms, 
whereas morphology is a branch of biology that studies the form 
and structure (internal and external) of organisms and their specific 
structural features. Table 1.1 shows the various fields of biology based 
on the structure they study.
Table1.1 Different fields of biology based on the structure 
studied
Sub-branch of 
biologyDefinition Example of the structures studied
Morphology Study of external form and structure Shape, the texture of leaves, 
stem, etc
Anatomy Study of the bodily structure of humans, animals, 
and other living organisms, especially as revealed 
by dissection and the separation of partsStomach, liver, heart, etc
Histology Study of the details of tissue structure Parenchyma, connective tissue
Cytology Study of cells A plant cell, a nerve cell
Cell biology Study of the structure, function, and various 
aspects of cell and its componentsMitochondrion, ribosome, 
nucleus, etc
Molecular 
BiologyStudy of structure and function of informational 
moleculesDNA, RNA
Many other branches of biology are concerned with the various life 
processes, such as how an organism multiplies or forms identical 
copies of itself, its evolution over millions of years, and its relationship 
with the environment. Table 1.2 lists some of these fields with the 
environment. Do you know how 
different branches of 
biology are related to the 
structure we study?
Activity 1.2 The Microorganisms
Microorganisms of different types are given in this activity. Work in 
a pair and do the following activities:
1.  Define bacteria, viruses, fungi, algae, microscopic protozoa 
and archaea.
2.  Draw typical bacteria, viruses, fungi, algae, microscopic 
protozoa and archaea.
What other branches of 
biology do you know?
3
Grade 10 Biology Unit One: Sub-fields of BiologyBiology is related to other sciences that study life as an energy 
state of all living things, their interrelationships, and links to their 
surroundings. Table 1.3 shows some of the interrelationships.Table 1.2 Subjects studied in various branches of Biology
Branch of 
biologySubject studies Examples
Physiology The normal functions of living organisms 
and their partsPhotosynthesis, digestion, etc
Embryology The embryo, from a single-celled zygote 
(fertilized ovum) to the formation of form 
and shapeStructure and development of ova, sperm, 
blastula (an embryo at early stage of 
development consisting of a hollow ball of cells), 
gastrula(the stage in embryonic development 
after blastula during  which the embryo develops 
two layers), etc
Ecology Interaction of organisms with the 
environmentFood chain, biomass, biosphere, etc
Taxonomy Identification, nomenclature, and 
classification of organismsThe biological name of a human is Homo 
sapiens and it was placed in the animal kingdom
Paleontology  Origin, growth, and structure of 
organisms of the pastFossils of organisms
Evolution The change in the characteristics of a 
species over several generations that relies 
on the process of natural selectionThe beaks of Darwin’s finches
Genetics Heredity and variation Gene concept, Mendel’s laws
Exobiology The origin, evolution, distribution, and 
future of life in the UniverseLife on Moon, life on Mars
Do you have any idea 
about the relationship 
between biology and 
other sciences?
Table1.3 Knowledge taken from other subjects that help to explain biological phenomenon
Structure/
mechanism studiedExample Related 
ScienceKnowledge of other sciences is required 
because
Cell membrane Structure of lipids and proteins Chemistry Living organisms are made of inorganic 
and organic compounds
Transportation of 
Oxygen (O2) in the 
bodyFormation of Oxyhaemoglobin 
(haemoglobin with oxygen)Chemistry All metabolic pathways involve chemi -
cal change
Excretory system Absorption and elimination of 
saltsChemistry Homeostasis involves acid-base equi -
librium to maintain the pH of living 
organisms
Absorption of food/
waterAbsorption of sugars, amino 
acids, fatty acids, water, or saltsChemistry During diffusion and osmosis mole -
cules move into and out of the cell
Transportation of 
water in plantsConduction of water from root 
to leavesPhysics Liquids have certain properties like 
cohesion and adhesion to result in sur -
face tension and capillary action which 
helps in certain processes
Release of energy 
during respirationElectron transport chain 
(transfer electrons from 
electron donors to electron 
acceptors via redox reactions)Chemistry Energy transfer and transport  
4
Grade 10 Biology Unit One: Sub-fields of BiologyActivity 1.3: Group Discussion
Which other relationships of biology with other disciplines do 
you know? Discuss in  groups of four of five  and present to your 
classmates. 
1.2  Pure and applied fields of biology
Pure biology is the study of how life functions in nature (behavior, 
internal and external structure, reproduction, etc.) whereas applied 
biology refers to using what you have learned in biology for (gardening, 
nursery work, agriculture, plant disease, forestry, poultry, etc.). 
Therefore, applied biology is the use of your knowledge of biology to 
manage life. The relationship is similar to anatomy and surgery.The previous section de -
scribed and briefly addressed 
various sub-fields of biology. 
Now, you will learn the cat -
egory of biology as pure and 
applied sub-fields.Recall
Activity 1.4: Categorizing pure and applied fields of biology
Select pure and applied fields of biology from the list given in the columns on the left side in the 
table below and categorize them in their appropriate column on the right side (columns A & B).
   Table 1.4 Pure and Applied fields of Biology
Fields of Biology Pure Biology (A) Applied Biology (B)
Agriculture
Morphology
Taxonomy
Horticulture Cytology
Embryology
Histology
Poultry
Agroforestry
Apiculture
Animal HusbandryBiotechnology
Molecular Biology
Evolution
Pathology
Physiology
Forestry
Pharmacognosy
Pisciculture
Paleontology
Bacteriology
Entomology
Sericulture  What do we mean by pure and applied fields of biology?
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
•	Classify	the	different	sub-fields	of	Biology	into	pure	and	applied
•	Define	each	sub-field	of	biologyObjectives
5
Grade 10 Biology Unit One: Sub-fields of BiologyIn some branches of science, biology has become very important 
in this millennium. With the above idea, let us discuss some of the 
biological importance of the branches of biology in other branches 
of sciences.
1) Biotechnology: is the use of living organisms or their products for 
the welfare of humanity. It involves the technical manipulation 
of a living organism’s genetic makeup (Genetic Engineering). A 
genetically modified and improved variety of crops and animals 
have been produced by biotechnology.
2) Bioinformatics: is concerned with the acquisition, storage, analysis, 
and dissemination of biological data, most often DNA and amino 
acid sequences. Bioinformatics uses computer programs for a 
variety of applications, including determining gene and protein 
functions, establishing evolutionary relationships, and predicting 
the three-dimensional shapes of proteins.
 3) Genetic Engineering: is a means of extracting selected genes from 
an organism or synthesizing selected genes and these genes are 
inserted into another organism; as a result, an organism develops 
with a new combination of genes, and this process is called genetic 
engineering. 
4) Biomedical Engineering: is the application of the principles 
and problem-solving techniques of engineering to biology and 
medicine. Biomedical engineering focuses on the advances that 
improve human health and health care at all levels
5) Environment Management: deals with environmental observation 
and finding out the solution to maintain the balance of nature.
6) Forensic Science: is the application of the knowledge of biological 
science (DNA fingerprints (unique patterns in DNA molecule), 
blood typing) to criminal and civil laws.
1.3 Major discoveries that revolutionized biology
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
•	Discuss	at	least	five	major	discoveries	that	revolutionized	
biologyObjectives
Biology is a fascinating and diverse subject area. If you’re thinking of 
studying Biology, here are the twelve famous discoveries to inspire 
you.Activity 1.6 Group 
discussion
In a group of 4 -5 students, 
discuss at least five 
major discoveries that 
revolutionized biology. 
Let your group’s secretary 
present your findings to the 
whole class.Activity 1.5: THINK-PAIR-
SHARE
In the previous parts of this 
unit, you have studied the 
different branches of biology. 
Now, in pair, take at least 3 
fields of biology and think 
of their importance in other 
branches of science. Finally, 
share your ideas with each 
other. 
6
Grade 10 Biology Unit One: Sub-fields of Biology1. Aristotle (384–322 BC)
Despite the fact that his name is rarely mentioned when discussing 
important biological discoveries, the ancient Greek philosopher 
Aristotle was responsible for a breakthrough classification system for 
living things. Aristotle’s classification system was known as the ‘Ladder 
of Life’ until the nineteenth century. For the first time, he established 
species relationships and grouped them correctly.
2. Galen (129–161 AD)
Galen’s efforts transformed medical science. Galen had a significant 
impact on the advancement of numerous medical specialties, including 
Anatomy, Pathology, Physiology, and Neurology. Among his important 
findings were the distinctions between veins and arteries, as well as 
the recognition that the larynx produces voice. Although many of his 
concepts contained scientific mistakes, his contribution to medical 
science is undeniable
3. Antonie van Leeuwenhoek (1632–1723)
Antonie van Leeuwenhoek is well renowned for his contributions to 
microscopy and how he applied it to the field of biology. He invented 
a method for making strong lenses that, according to some, could 
magnify up to 500 times. Leeuwenhoek employed microscopes to learn 
more about the biological world; among his findings were bacteria and 
the vacuole of the cell.
4. Carl Linnaeus (1707–1775)
Carl Linnaeus, a botanist, physician, and naturalist, devised the method 
for naming, ordering, and classifying creatures that we still use today. 
His extensive collection of plant, animal, and shell specimens inspired 
him to devise a system for classifying and naming species. He separated 
items into three categories – animals, plants, and minerals – and further 
organized living things into classes, orders, genera, and species. ‘Homo 
sapiens, ’ for example - ‘homo’ is the genus and ‘sapiens’ is the species.
5. Charles Darwin (1809–1882)
Probably the most famous naturalist of all time, Charles Darwin’s 
contribution to biology and society is immense. He established that 
all species of life descended over time from common ancestors, with 
species continuing to exist through the process of natural selection. 
His theory of evolution was published in On the Origin of Species in 
1859 and it caused quite the stir – he was disputing the long-held belief 
that all species had been created by God at the beginning of the world. 
Evolution by natural selection combined with Mendelian genetics 
is now accepted as the modern evolutionary synthesis and forms the 
foundations of much biological scientific endeavor. 
Figure 1.6 Aristotle
Figure 1.7 Galen 
Figure 1.8 Antonie 
van Leeuwenhoek
Figure 1.9 Carl 
Linnaeus
Figure 1.10 Charles 
Darwin
7
Grade 10 Biology Unit One: Sub-fields of Biology6. Gregor Mendel (1822–1884)
Gregor Mendel’s extraordinary contribution didn’t get the 
recognition it deserved until long after the friar’s death. He used peas 
to discover and demonstrate the laws of genetic inheritance, coining 
the terms ‘dominant’ and ‘recessive’ genes in the process. The laws 
were rediscovered at the turn of the 20th century and provided the 
mechanism for Darwin’s theory of natural selection to occur. The 
two theories combine to form our current understanding of the 
evolutionary process.
7. Louis Pasteur (1822-1895)
Louis Pasteur is regarded as the father of medical microbiology. 
His contributions to science, technology, and medicine are nearly 
unparalleled in history. He pioneered molecular asymmetry 
research, demonstrated that bacteria cause fermentation and disease, 
introduced pasteurization, rescued France’s beer, wine, and silk 
industries, and developed anthrax and rabies vaccines.
8. Robert Koch (1843-1910)
Robert Koch was a well-known German physician who pioneered 
microbiology. As the father of modern bacteriology, he is credited 
with pinpointing the precise causal agents of tuberculosis, cholera, 
and anthrax, as well as providing experimental support for the 
concept of infectious disease.
9. Jane Goodall (1934)
Our knowledge of wildlife and conservation has been transformed 
by Jane Goodall, the UK ethologist. Best known for her career-long 
studies of chimpanzees, she discovered the animals are omnivores 
and tool users. She’s a global leader in animal rights and was awarded 
a Ph.D. degree from the University of Cambridge without holding a 
bachelor’s degree.
10) Barbara McClintock (1902–1992)
American geneticist Barbara McClintock spent her career analyzing 
maize, where she developed a technique for identifying and examining 
chromosomes individually. Despite it not being immediately 
recognized, her work made it possible for us to map human genomes. 
She was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 1983 for her discovery of 
transposition and how genes could turn their physical characteristics 
on and off.
Figure 1.11 Gregor 
Mendel
Figure 1.12 Barbara 
McClintock
Figure 1.14 Jane 
Goodall 
Figure 1.5 Robert 
Koch
Figure 1.4 Louis 
Pasteur
8
Grade 10 Biology Unit One: Sub-fields of Biology11. Watson (1928–) and Crick (1916–2004)
James Watson and Francis Crick were shot to fame in 1962 for their 
discovery of the structure of DNA, winning the medical Nobel Prize 
in the process. Their model of DNA (double helix) explains how 
DNA replicates, and hereditary information is coded and passed 
on to descendants. The discovery of DNA structure has led to a 
much more developed understanding of function – used in disease 
diagnosis and treatment, forensics, and more.
12. Wilmut (1944) and Campbell (1954–2012)
In 1996 Ian Wilmut and Keith Campbell cloned a mammal, famously 
named Dolly the Sheep. The pair cloned Dolly using a single adult 
sheep cell and a process of nuclear transfer. Dolly died after six years 
but cloning continues, although still not perfect, and certainly not 
ready for human application.
 
1.4  The contributions of biological discoveries 
to society and the environment
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
•		Appreciate	the	contribution	of	biological	discoveries	to	society/
environment	(e.g.	microscope, 	penicillin, 	inheritance, 	etc.)Objectives
The invention of devices such as microscopes and curative medications 
such as penicillin has transformed human life. The biological 
discoveries aided humans in developing abilities required for the 
use of living systems or influencing natural processes to produce 
products, systems, or settings that aid in human development. Some 
biological discoveries and their impact on human society and the 
natural environment are described further in this sub-section.
The Microscope
The microscope is a device that magnifies objects or organisms 
that are too small to be seen with the naked eye. A milestone in the 
science world, the microscope has had an enormous influence on 
Figure 1.13 Watson and Crick
Figure 1.15 Wilmut and 
Campbell
Activity 1.7 Group and individual work
1.  Mention at least ten more biological findings and explore their 
central issues in pairs. Finally, present them to the entire class. 
2.  What do you feel about biological discoveries? Do you have 
any possible issue in mind that can be discovered? Share with 
your friends. 
Figure 1.16 The Microscope
9
Grade 10 Biology Unit One: Sub-fields of Biologythe development of modern medical, forensics, and environmental 
sciences. The invention of the microscope has revolutionized the 
science industry while developing other fields:
Medical field
The use of microscopes in medicine began in the 1860s when 
Louis Pasteur reported that the microscopic organisms he saw 
in the microscope caused certain diseases. Until that time, people 
thought diseases came from evil spirits or God. Pasteur’s germ theory 
revolutionized the process of identifying, treating, and preventing 
infectious diseases. Today, hospital laboratories use microscopes to 
identify which microbe is causing an infection so physicians can 
prescribe the proper medicine. They are also used to diagnose cancer 
and other diseases.
Ecosystem study
The microscope is used to study the health of an ecosystem. Field 
biologists utilize microscopes to observe a specific habitat, such 
as a marine environment, by identifying the types and numbers 
of microscopic organisms found in ecosystem samples. This 
helps scientists in defining the ecosystem, detecting threats to an 
ecosystem, and determining the relationship of the organisms with 
their environments.
Forensic Science 
The microscope has greatly affected the field of forensic science. 
Forensics is a field of science used to gather and analyze evidence 
to establish facts that are used in a legal scenario. The microscope 
is used to examine pieces of evidence collected at a crime scene that 
may have information not visible to the human eye, For example, 
striations in bullets can be examined under a microscope to see if 
they match bullets shot from a particular gun.
Atomic Study
The invention of the powerful atomic force (electron) microscope 
has enabled scientists to study cells at an atomic level. This enables 
scientists to scrutinize viruses at their atomic level and influence them 
for the delivery of innovative treatments. The electron microscope 
also enables scientists to study and understand the types of viruses 
and understand how they infect the body. 
Genetic Study 
The microscope has had a significant impact on genetics research. 
A microscope is used by scientists to examine certain genetic 
makeup. This also allows scientists to evaluate genetic abnormalities, 
regeneration, and tissue death. The science of genetics is used to Mention and discuss types of 
microscopes with the highest 
magnification and resolution 
power (refer back to grade 
9 textbook on the micro -
scopes).Recall
Activity 1.8 Answer to the 
question
In your previous classes, 
you may have studied about 
discoveries in medicine. Can 
you mention some of them? 
Tell at least two of such dis -
coveries and their importance 
to human wellbeing and 
proceed working on the next 
activity.
10
Grade 10 Biology Unit One: Sub-fields of Biologyexamine infected tissue. Histologists will be able to explore future 
therapies and preventive drugs as a result of this research.
Tissue Analysis 
It is common for histologists to study cells and tissues using a 
microscope. For example, if a section of tissue is taken for analysis, 
histologists can use a microscope in combination with other tools to 
determine if the sample is cancerous.
2. Discoveries in Medicine
Science has never moved at such a rapid rate as it is happening now. 
As each discovery brings with it countless more developments, 
it stands to reason that our scientific understanding has upgraded 
with time. So great are many of these developments in fact, and they 
have impacted our daily life styles so much; it’s sometimes almost 
impossible to imagine a world before  many of these breakthroughs. 
This is particularly true of medical discoveries, and while we might 
complain of long hospital waiting lists or the poor bedside manner 
of some of the nurses, we shouldn’t forget that only a few generations 
ago, how ‘irritating it was’ to amputate a limb without anaesthesia.
.
Activity 1.9: Fill in the space with benefits of the discoveries
Discoveries in medicine and their relevance: To honour these advances and put things into perspective, 
let us take a look at the eleven most important medical discoveries, as well as how they have impacted 
us today. This activity in table 1.5 outlines the type of discovery and the person who made it. You are 
required to explain its benefits to people.
 Table 1.5 Types of discoveries
Type of discovery Who discovered and year of discovery Benefits
The Circulatory 
System  1242 by the physician Ibn al-Nafis, and first brought to 
prominence in 1628 by William Harvey
Vaccination Jenner’ France, 1799
Cell theory Theodor Schwann and Matthias schleiden, 1838
Germ Theory  Louis Pasteur, 1861
X-Ray  Conrad Rontgen, 1895
Vitamins  Frederick Hopkins, 1900s
Insulin Frederick Banting, 1920
Penicillin Alexander Fleming, 1928
DNA Swiss chemist Friedrich Miescher, 1860/70s 
Anaesthetics Sigmund Freud and Karl Koller 1st clinical use in 1884; 
Albert Niemann extracted from leaves of Coca in 1860
HIV Robert Gallo and Luc Montagnier, 1980s
11
Grade 10 Biology Unit One: Sub-fields of Biology3. Inheritance (Application of Genetics)
Before 1900, the history of genetics was related to cytology. This owes 
to “Robert Hooke” , who elaborated various smaller things in a thinly 
sliced cork section from a mature tree. In 1831, Brown discovered 
a consistent structure present in a regular way, called “nucleus” . 
Then Schleiden and Schwann presented “cell theory” (1836-1840) 
to depict various structures present in the cell and their nature. It 
was a great contribution to understanding cell structure. After other 
contributions, in 1884-1885, four scientists (Hertwig, Kolliker, 
Weismann (all zoologists), and Strasburger (botanist) derived that 
heredity matter existed in the nucleus in that material which makes 
up chromosomes.
After the discovery of Mendel’s work and his laws, Genetics took a 
progressive turn and revolutionized. Working on this subject is still 
moving. Genetics is providing numerous services to humanity in 
almost every field of life. Thus, its prominent role never is neglected 
in the welfare and betterment of human lives, in one way or the 
other. To study more about the role of genetics for a human, do the 
following activity (Activity 1.10).
1.5 Ethiopian biologists and their contributions
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
•	appreciate	major	discoveries	contributed	by	Ethiopian	Scientists
•		discuss	 the	importance	 of	discoveries	 contributed	 by	Ethiopian	
scientists	to	human	beingsObjectives
Three of the Ethiopian scientists and their discoveries are given 
below.
1. Professor Yalemtsehay Mekonnen 
Prof. Yalemtsehay is a biologist and an academic member of staff at the 
Department of Biology, Faculty of Science, Addis Ababa University. 
She has worked in this department for the last 30 years. She received 
her Ph.D., specializing in human physiology, from the University of 
Heidelberg in Germany. One of her research areas is the assessment 
of the impact of chemical pesticide hazards on humans. Activity 1.10: Application of 
Genetics
Write about the application 
of genetic discoveries in: 
1. agriculture    
2. medicine
3. biological diversity  
4. immunity   
5. inheritance
Do you know some of the major discoveries of Ethiopian 
biologists? Mention at least 3 of them and explain their 
contributions.
12
Grade 10 Biology Unit One: Sub-fields of BiologyThis research covers almost all government farms including the 
Upper Awash agricultural farms and some private horticultural farms 
in the Rift Valley region. The other area of her research is in the use of 
plants as medicine against human and animal diseases.
Professor Yalemtsehay has published over 100 scientific papers in 
reputable journals in the areas of plants of medicinal and nutritional 
value in vivo and in vitro physiological tests of useful plant 
extracts, assessment of health hazards to humans, animals and the 
environment, advocacy and collaborative work for the promotion of 
safe and sustainable use of natural resources, to name but few. She 
has done notable research on medicinal plants especially on Moringa 
Stenopetala (shiferaw/Alekko Shekatta). 
2. Dr. Aklilu Lemma 
Schistosomiasis is a common parasitic disease. It affects 200–300 
million people in Africa (including Ethiopia), South America, Asia, 
and parts of the Caribbean. It is caused by parasitic flatworms which 
spend part of their lifecycle in freshwater snails and part in humans. 
Anyone washing, working, or playing in shallow freshwater is at risk.
Once inside a person, the parasites mature and produce eggs which 
are passed out in the urine and feces. They also infest the blood 
vessels, liver, kidneys, bladder, and other organs. The body sets up 
an immune reaction and an infected person can become weakened 
and ill for many years. Some of the most important work in finding 
a way of controlling this parasite, which is effective but does not cost 
too much, was carried out by Dr. Aklilu Lemma, one of Ethiopia’s 
most renowned biologists. 
Dr. Aklilu began his work in 1964 when he was investigating the 
freshwater snails that carry the Schistosomiasis parasite around 
Adwa in northern Ethiopia. He saw women washing clothes in the 
water and he noticed that downstream of the washing party there 
were more dead snails than anywhere else he had collected. The 
women were using the soapberry, ‘Endod’ in Amharic (Phytolacca 
dodecane Dr.a), to make washing suds. Dr. Aklilu collected some live 
snails from above the washing party and asked one of the women to 
give him some of her Endod suds. Not long after the suds were put 
in the snail container, all the snails died. This was the start of years 
of work for Dr. Aklilu. Back in the laboratory, he showed that if the 
Endod berries were dried, crushed, and diluted in water they would 
kill snails at very low concentrations. 
Other scientists carried out similar investigations and got the same 
results. If the freshwater snails can be controlled, the spread of 
Figure 1.18 Dr. Aklilu  
Lemma
Figure 1.17 Prof. Yalemtsehay 
Mekonnen
13
Grade 10 Biology Unit One: Sub-fields of Biologyschistosomiasis can be greatly reduced. The World Health Organization 
recommended a chemical molluscicide (i.e. a compound that kills 
mollusks including snails) but it was extremely expensive. Endod 
works well, it is cheap and well known by local people who are likely to 
use it and it is environment friendly as it breaks down naturally within 
about two days. Dr. Aklilu Lemma worked for many years to convince 
scientists all around the world that his ideas would work. Trials using 
locally collected Endod showed that using the molluscicide worked. 
Before the water was treated, 50% of children 1–6 years old were 
infected. After treatment, only 7% were infected by the flatworm. 
Dr. Aklilu’s results were published in journals around the world. He 
found the best species of the soapberry plant and developed programs 
for local communities to treat their water. Eventually, people were 
convinced and the use of Endod-based molluscicides is spreading 
throughout Africa and beyond. He has been honored and recognized 
in many different ways both in Ethiopia and around the world for his 
work.
3. Professor Gebissa Ejeta
When Prof. Gebissa Ejeta was born in a small rural village his mother 
was determined her son would receive a good education. He walked 20 
miles to school every sun day evening, returning home on Friday after 
a week of studying. It all paid off as he joined Jimma Agricultural and 
Technical School and then Alemaya College.
He specializes in plant breeding and genetics. Prof. Gebissa Ejeta did 
his research on sorghum He got his Ph.D. from Purdue University in 
the USA where he still holds a professorship. He has helped to develop 
Africa’s first commercial hybrid strain of sorghum. This sorghum 
variety not only needs less water and so is resistant to drought, but it 
also yields more grain than traditional varieties. 
Prof. Gebissa Ejeta developed other varieties of sorghum that are also 
resistant to the parasitic Striga weed, which can destroy a big percentage 
of a crop. Prof. Gebissa’s work has made a very big difference to the food 
availability in many areas of Ethiopia and other African countries. His 
varieties yield up to ten times more than others. In 2009, Prof. Gebissa 
Ejeta was awarded the World Food Prize, which is the most prestigious 
agricultural prize in the world. He has also been awarded the National 
Hero award of Ethiopia for his work in science and technology. These 
are just some of the many renowned Ethiopian biologists who have 
carried out work of great value both in Ethiopia and across the world. 
You will have the opportunity to find out more about some of the other 
scientists with your teacher in activity 1.11.
Figure 1.19 Prof. Gabissa 
Ejeta
14
Grade 10 Biology Unit One: Sub-fields of Biology•	Zoology, 	Botany, 	and	Microbiology	are	the	three	major	branches	of	biology.	
•	Some	 sub-fields	 of	biology	 have	 existed	 for	hundreds	 of	years, 	while	 others	 are	much 	newer	 and	
often 	developing	rapidly.	
•	Anatomy, 	physiology, 	bacteriology, 	mycology, 	genetics, 	cytology, 	histology, 	embryology, 	taxono -
my	and	evolution, 	are	some	of	the	subfields	of	biology.
•	Every	scientific	discovery	is	remarkable, 	and	some	are	truly	life-changing.	
•	There	have	been 	numerous	great	discoveries	throughout	the	lengthy	history	of	biology.
•	Almost	 all	scientific	 discoveries	 help	 us	learn 	a	little	 bit	more	 about	 this	magnificent	 world	 we	live	
in,	and	some	discoveries	help	us	discover	more.	
•	Some	 scientific	 breakthroughs	 allowed	 biologists	 to	see	even 	deeper	 into	 life,	the	world, 	and	ev-
erything:	 the	microscope	 (Antonie	 van	Leeuwenhoek), 	the	law	of	inheritance	 (Gregor	 Mendel), 	
are	some	examples.
•	The	 biological	 discoveries	 aided	 people	 in	developing	 abilities	 required	 for	using	 living	 systems	
or	influencing	 natural	 processes	 to	produce	 products, 	systems, 	or	environments	 that	 aid	in	hu-
man	development.	
•	Some	biological	discoveries	that	have	had	an 	impact	on 	human 	civilization 	and	the	natural	envi -
ronment	 include:	 microscopes, 	medications, 	and	laws	 of	heredity, 	germ 	theory, 	blood	 circulation 	
in	human, 	etc.
•	Discoveries	 of	Ethiopian 	biologists	 have	 made	 significant	 contributions	 to	society	 and	develop -
ment.	
•	Dr.	 Aklilu	 Lemma’s	 discovery	 of	soapberry	 ‘Endod’	 against	 bilharzia	 (Schistosomiasis), 	a	preva -
lent	parasitic	 ailment, 	and	Prof.	 Gebissa	 Ejeta’s	 series	 of	study	 findings	 on	Sorghum 	varieties	 and	
productivity	are	only	a	few	examples	of	contributions	of	Ethiopian 	biologists.Unit SummaryActivity 1.11 Fill in the column with contributions
In	section 	1.5	of	this	unit, 	you	have	 learned	 about	 the	contributions	 of	three	 Ethiopian 	scientists.	 In	the	
table	 below, 	you	are	given 	the	names	 of	other	 known 	biologists	 who	 have	 contributed	 to	the	development	
of	Ethiopian 	biological	 science	 and	scientific	 research.	 Write	 the	date	 and	type	 of	their	 contributions	 in	
the	right	hand	column 	of	the	table	below.
Ethiopian Biologist Contribution to the development of biological education and re -
search
Prof. Beyene Petros
Dr. Brihane Asfaw
Prof. Ensermu Kelbesa
Prof . Legesse Negash
Dr. Melaku Wolde
Prof. Mogessoe Ashenafi
Dr. Tewoldebrihan G/Egziabiher
Prof. Tilahun Yilma
Dr. Tsehaynesh Asfaw
Dr. Zeresenay Alemseged
15
Grade 10 Biology Unit One: Sub-fields of Biology I. True False
Write “True” for correct statements and “False” for the incorrect once on the space provided.
1. X-ray was discovered by Frederick Bating in 1895.
2. Biochemistry deals with the chemical reactions that take place in living organisms.
3. Microscope was discovered by Theodor Schwann in 1838.
4. Genetics is the study of heredity and variation.
5.  The scientific contribution of Prof. Gabissa Ejeta is on the application of Endod to control 
Bilharzia.
II. Matching
Match 	the	description 	of	field	of	study	given 	under	Column 	A	with 	the	field	of	study	given 	under	
column 	B,	and	write	the	letter	of	your	answer	on 	the	space	provided.
Column “A” Column “B”
1The study of insects A. Cytology
2Embryological development of the fetus B. Agroforestry
3The study of tissue C. Histology
4The study of mixed agriculture D. Entomology
5The study of cells E. Embryology
III. Multiple Choice
Choose	the	best	answer	from 	the	given 	alternatives	(A, 	B,	C	&	D).
1.	The	evolutionary	history	of	an 	organism 	is	known 	as
A.	Anatomy	 	 B.	Ancestry	 	 Palaeontology	 	 D.	Phylogeny
2.	Who	discovered	the	circulation 	of	blood?
A.	Ibn 	al-Nafis	 	 B.		McCollum	 	 C.		Scottish 	naval	 D.	Edward	Mellanby
3.	The	study	of	the	internal	structure	of	an 	organism 	is
A.	Morphology	 	 B.	Anatomy	 	 C.	Histology	 	 D.	Systematic
4.	Anatomy	is	the	study	of
A.	Life	 	 	 B.	Body	parts	 	 C.	Animals	 	 D.	Ocean
5.	Who	is	regarded	as	the	father	of	genetics?
A.	Grogor	Mendel	 B.	Gabissa	Ejeta	 C.	Scottish 	naval	 D.	Edward	Mellanby
6.	Who	first	discovered	the	germ 	theory	of	disease?
A.	Louis	Pasteur	B.	Alexander	Flaming			C.	Frederick	Banting	 	 D.	August	Weismann
7.	Who	discovered	vitamins?
A. Anton 	Van	Leeuwenhoek	 B.	Frederick	Hopkins	 C.	James	Watt	 D.	All	of	the	above
8.	Bilharzia	is	caused	by:
A.	Snails		 B.		Bacteria	 C.	Parasitic	flatworms	 	 	 D.	Viruses
 IV. Short answer 
1.	How	biology	and	chemistry	are	interrelated	in 	biochemistry?
2.	Discuss	the	role	of	genetic	discoveries	in 	agricultural	development.
3.	How	biological	studies	help	human 	to	keep	healthy	life?
4.	What	are	the	major	discoveries	of	Louis	Pasteur?	
5.	How	does	biology	and	physics	interrelation 	form 	a	study	termed	biophysics?Review Questions
16
Grade 10 Biology Unit One: Sub-fields of BiologyContents Learning competencies
2.1.  Characteristics of plants
2.2. Non-flowering and flowering 
plants
2.3. Structure and function of plant 
parts
2.4. Reproduction in plants
2.4.1. Non-flowering
2.4.2. Flowering
2.4.3. Pollination
2.5. Seeds (monocots, dicots)
2.6. Seed Dispersal and Germination
2.7. Photosynthesis
2.8. Transport in plants
2.9. Response in plants
2.10. Medicinal plants 
2.11.Renowned Botanists in Ethiopia2.1 explain the characteristics of plants
2.2 differentiate between flowering and non-flowering plants
2.3 draw and label the internal and external structure of 
angiosperms
2.4 draw and label the floral parts
2.5 list different types of agents of pollination
2.6 draw and label the reproductive cycles of flowering and non-
flowering plants using typical examples 
2.7 infer seed dispersal mechanisms by looking at the nature of 
seeds
2.8 discuss the process and mechanisms of photosynthesis
2.9 conduct experiment on germination of dicot and monocot 
seeds
2.10 discuss the mechanism of water, mineral, and organic 
molecules transport in plants and its implication on 
agricultural productivity
2.11 conduct experiments to demonstrate plant responses 
(geotropism, hydrotropism, phototropism)
2.12 investigate medicinal plants used by the local people to treat 
different ailments
2.13 appreciate the works of Ethiopian Botanists
2.1. Characteristics of plants
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
•	list			the	characteristics		of	plants	
•	distinguish	unique	features	of	plants	Objectives
The word plant includes a range of living organism which share many 
characteristics in common.  Some of their characteristics are common 
with other living things, while they have unique characteristics that 
belong to plants. Major characteristics of plants are listed hereunder. 
You are expected to distinguish characteristics plants share with other Revise what you learned 
in Grade 9: Unit 2 about 
• Definition of life 
•  Characteristics of 
living things  Recall
What are the common characteristics of all living things? 
What are the characteristics of plants?
       Unit 2: Plants
17
Grade 10 Biology Unit Two: Plantsliving things from those features which are unique to plants.    
• Plants are living things. Like other living things plants grow, 
reproduce and respond to changes in the environment. 
• Plants are multicellular. They are made up of many eukaryotic 
cells.   These cells have well-defined nuclei and membrane-bound 
organelles.  In addition to the cell membrane, plant cells have a 
rigid cell wall made primarily of cellulose. 
• Plants are autotrophic (self–feeding). Plant cells contain the green 
pigment chlorophyll which enables them to absorb sunlight and 
produce their own food.  Thus, they are also named Producers.
• Plants are sessile. They cannot move by themselves.  They remain 
fixed at one place, firmly anchored to the soil by their root. However, 
the leaves of plants can turn towards light and some respond to 
touch. The roots of plants can also orient towards water or moist 
soil.
• Plants practice asexual and sexual reproduction patterns. In 
lower plants such as mosses and liverworts, asexual reproduction 
through spores is the dominant form. On the other hand, in higher 
and seed-bearing plants such as gymnosperms and angiosperms, 
sexual reproduction which involves the union of gametes or sex 
cells is the dominant and visible form
2.2 Flowering and non – flowering plants 
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
•	differentiate	between	flowering		and	non	–	flowering	plants,
•	use	plant	reproductive	structure		for	classifying	plants	and	
•	realize	floral	structure	as	a	strong	marker		for	classificationObjectives
Indeed, the concept “plant” is widely associated with those that have 
flowers, root, stem and leaves having transporting vessels (vascular 
bundles). However, as shown in Figure 2.1 there is a huge number of 
lower plants, such as mosses and liverworts which are non – vascular, 
i.e., do not have transporting system or conducting vessels, essential 
to transport water, nutrient and food needed for the plant. The non – 
vascular plants, are generally small with limited height and restricted 
to moist and shaded areas.  These lower plants are seedless and do 
not have flowers and fruits.
There are still large numbers of plants known as gymnosperms with ACTIVITY 2.1 THINK– PAIR- 
SHARE
Direction: 
Pair with a friend sitting next 
to you and share what you 
think of the following key 
issues. Write down points 
you discussed to share to 
your classmates 
• Would there be life in the 
absence of plants? Give 
justification to your answer.
• What is your reaction to a 
person who is using  nail 
to  fix notice board or 
plate  on  a   tree  or  firmly  
tying  metal wire  or plastic 
wire  around the stem of   
growing  plants  to hang wet 
clothes for sun drying  ? 
• List down your reasons to 
convince the person.
Revise what you learned in 
Grade 9: Unit 2 about 
The five kingdom 
classification  Recall
What do you know about 
flowers and flowering 
plants? 
How do plants reproduce 
without flowers?
What comes to your mind 
when you think about 
plants?
18
Grade 10 Biology 18Unit Two: Plantswell-developed root stem and leaves but have no flowers. Their 
reproductive organ is cone, instead of flowers. Moreover, the seeds 
produced in their cone are without cover (naked seeds). 
Flowering plants, commonly known as Angiosperms, are also vascular 
with well-developed root, stem and leaves. But unlike gymnosperms, 
they have flowers and produce seeds within a fruit.
     
    
Figure 2.1 Major groups of plants 
ACTIVITY 2.2   COOPERATIVE LEARNING   
Direction:
Form a group of four students (two neighboring pairs). Critically 
look at Figure 2.1 and answer the following questions.  Then 
compare your answers with other groups of your classmates  
• Which plant groups would be included under non – flowering 
plants?
• Why is flower important marker of classification? (This may 
need library work or browsing on the Internet  to collect more 
information)  
• Construct a table that shows similarities and differences 
between gymnosperms and angiosperms? 
19
Grade 10 Biology 19Unit Two: Plants2.3 Structure and function of plant parts 
Like any organism, plants have different structures which perform 
a vital function essential for the plant life. In this sub-topic, we will 
focus on the external and internal structure of a flowering plant 
(angiosperm).
As illustrated in Figure 2. 2, the external structure of a typical 
angiosperm has two major systems. 
The shoot system: This is the plant part usually found above the 
ground and includes the organs such as stem, branches, leaves, buds, 
flowers and fruits. The last two organs may be missing depending on 
the reproductive stage of the plant.   
The root system:  This is the part of the plant that usually grows 
downward into the ground. It includes the primary or tap root, lateral 
or branch roots, root hairs and root cap. Roots are distinguished from 
an underground stem in that, it does not bear either leaves or buds.
                  
                           
Figure 2.2 External structure of a typical angiosperm (flowering plant)Think of flowering plant, 
which is found around 
your home or school 
campus. List major 
structures and describe 
their functions before you 
learn about structures of 
a plant in class.
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
•	draw	the	external	and	internal	structure	of	angiosperms, 		
•	label	the	external	and	internal	structure	of		angiosperms		and	
•	relate	the	structure	of	plants	with	the	function	they	performObjectives
ACTIVITY 2.3  FIELD  
WORK
Material needed: A typical  
plant having complete 
organs of a flowering  plant 
as illustrated in Figure 2.2  
Direction  
Form a group of three to  
four students  and 
• Collect a plant from your 
school campus or locality 
that resembles Figure 2.2
• Look at the plant collected 
and identify the shoot 
systems ,  buds  (apical 
and axillary bud), leaves, 
flower and  root system 
(tap root and lateral root)
• Prepare a properly labeled 
diagram of your life 
specimen (Real plant)  
showing all the parts that 
you have identified 
• Discuss how you 
differentiate  underground 
stems from root.
20
Grade 10 Biology 20Unit Two: PlantsFigure 2.3 shows the external structure of leaf and the types of root.  
The external structure of a typical leaf consists of the petiole (leaf 
stalk), lamina (blade – broadest part), midrib, margin, base and tips 
(Figure 2.3 a).  The lamina is the broadest part, which is   flat, wide 
and commonly thin. It provides large surface area, which enables leaf 
to collect light. Its thinness creates short distance for gas exchange 
through the stomata (tiny pores).    The midrib is harder and contains 
the vein (transporting vessels) of the leaf as well as supportive tissues 
with hard cell wall.  Leaves of different plants show difference in 
absence or presence of petiole, leaf shape (variation in leaf margin, 
base and tips) and arrangement of veins. 
With regard to root, there are basically two types of roots (Figure 
2.3b) , namely tap-roots and fibrous roots
A tap-root consists of one large, primary vertical root. It has very 
few lateral roots that develop and grow from this main root.  By 
penetrating deep into the soil, tap roots provide stability (anchorage) 
and absorb water located deep in the ground.  Tap root system is a 
feature of dicot plants.
A fibrous root   is usually formed by thin, moderately branching 
roots growing from stems. They are more or less similar size and 
length. In grasses they develop as consists of fine hair – like root that.  
Spread out from the base of the stem. Fibrous root is very efficient for 
absorbing water and minerals close to soil surface.  It creates a thick 
network of roots that are good at holding soil together and protect 
soil from erosion.  Fibrous roots are features of monocot plants . 
 
Figure 2.3 External structure of a typical leaf (A) and Types of roots 
(B)How do you relate  the 
structures of leaf and 
roots to their  function?
A B
21
Grade 10 Biology 21Unit Two: Plants2.3.1 The internal structure of  a leaf 
In this section, you will explore the internal structure or tissues of a 
green leaf that made it best suited for food synthesis. Figure 2.4 shows 
components of the two internal layers of a leaf, namely; Outer layer 
and middle (inner) layer. 
A)  Outer layer
This is also known as the epidermis, a single layer of tightly packed 
cells that covers the upper and lower surface of the leaf. The upper 
epidermis is usually covered by a waxy cuticle, which transmits 
sunlight for photosynthesis but restricts water loss by evaporation 
from the leaf tissue.  The lower epidermis usually contains bean-
shaped guard cells that leave open spaces known as stomata (singular 
stoma). Stomata are “little mouths” or “ little noses” , which regulate 
O2 release, CO 2 intake and  water loss. In most leaves, stomata are 
more abundant in the lower epidermis, reducing water loss due to 
direct sunlight. 
B) Middle layer 
This is known as the mesophyll (“middle leaf”) layer.  It lies between 
the upper and lower epidermis. It includes tissues that are directly or 
indirectly involved in photosynthesis. There are two regions in the 
mesophyll layer  
The palisade layer is composed of regularly arranged and closely 
packed columnar (vertically elongated) cells.  The cells contain the 
largest number of chloroplasts per cell. As the layer is immediately 
beneath the upper epidermis, it is in the best position to capture 
most of the sunlight and this enables it to carry out most of the 
photosynthesis. The slight but precise separation of the columnar 
cells maximizes the diffusion of CO 2   and capillary movement of 
H20.ACTIVITY 2.4  PEER DISCUSSION 
Material needed: A typical leaf  and roots  as shown in Figure 2.3  
Direction: Form a group of four students (two neighboring pairs) and  
• Collect a leaf and roots  from your school campus or locality that resembles Figure 2.3
• Identify the different parts of a leaf (petiole, leaf base, margin, apex and midrib). Draw prepare a 
properly labeled diagram of the leaf   in your exercise book 
• Describe  and show  how leaves of  different plants differ in their morphology   
• Use a hand lens and examine the leaf veins and distributions of tiny pores.  What is the function of 
these structures?  
• Use the real root  you collected and label the different parts of  the tap root of Figure 2.3B
• Examine the root hairs with a hand lens and note why root hairs are best suited for absorption..
22
Grade 10 Biology 22Unit Two: PlantsThe spongy layer – lies below the palisade cells. Spongy cells are 
irregularly shaped with fewer chloroplasts. They are very loosely 
arranged with numerous airspaces. These air spaces, which are  very 
close to the stomata allow the diffusion of O 2, water vapour and CO 2.
Figure 2.4 Internal structure of a leaf 
2.3.2 The internal structure of a stem 
Figure 2.5 shows the internal structure of a typical dicot stem of a 
flowering plant. Accordingly, the detailed internal structure includes 
the following fundamental tissue systems. 
The epidermis  is the outermost layer of the stem. The outer walls 
are greatly thickened with cuticles, which minimizes the rate of 
transpiration. Moreover, the cells are compactly arranged, which 
in turn protect the underlying tissues from mechanical injury and 
prevent the entry of harmful organisms.
Figure 2.5 Internal structure of a typical dicot stem (A = Ground plan; B = Transverse section)
23
Grade 10 Biology 23Unit Two: PlantsHypodermis  lies below the epidermis. It is mainly composed of 
collencyma cells that are specially thickened at the corners due to the 
deposition of thick cellulose. This enables the layer to give mechanical 
strength to the stem.  
Cortex  consists of few layers of thin-walled, large, round, or oval 
cells, having intercellular space and serving for storage of food.
Endodermis  is the innermost layer of the cortex that separates the 
cortex from the vascular bundles. The cells are compactly arranged 
and usually contain starch grains. Thus, the endodermis serves as a 
food reserve and may be termed as a starch sheath.
Vascular bundles are longitudinal strands of conducting tissues or 
transporting vessels, consisting essentially of xylem and phloem 
arranged in a ring around the central pith. Each bundle has a 
patch of xylem towards the pith and a patch of phloem towards the 
endodermis and a strip of actively dividing young cells (cambium) in 
between them. Xylem transports water and dissolved minerals to the 
photosynthetic tissues, mainly to the leaf while phloem transports 
synthesized food to different tissues, either for utilization or storage.
Pith – occupies the central portion of the stem, composed of thin-
walled cells, which are rounded or polygonal, with or without 
intercellular space. It stores food and helps in the internal translocation 
of water.
 ACTIVITY 2.5  LIBRARY WORK  
Note: Angiosperms have their seeds enclosed inside fruits. They can be classified as “Monocots” and 
“Dicots” , having one and two cotyledon (s) respectively.  Typical examples include maize (a monocot) 
and bean (a dicot).  
Direction:
• Using illustration (Figure 2.5), you can learn the internal structure of a dicot stem.  For a contrast, 
you need to know the internal structure of a monocot stem.  
• Refer to biology books available in your library or download pictures showing the internal structure 
of monocot stem from the internet. Then draw and label the picture in your exercise book.
• Complete the following table of comparison to show the differences between the internal structure 
of the dicot and monocot stem. The column under dicot is filled to you for references.  
Dicot stem Monocot stem 
Contains   distinct regions known as cortex ,   vascular bundles and pith 
( stele)
Has  few number ( 4 to 8) of set of vascular bundles 
Vascular bundles are arranged regularly in the form of one or two rings
Pith is present and well developed https://pediaa.com/
what-is-the-difference-
between-monocot-stem-
and-dicot-stem 
24
Grade 10 Biology 24Unit Two: Plants2.3.3 The internal structure of a  root 
As illustrated in Figure 2.6 below, the transverse section of the dicot 
root shows the following plan of arrangement of tissues from the 
periphery to the centre.
Peliferous layer  is the outermost layer made up of single-layer cells. 
The cuticle is absent. . It consists the single-celled root hairs.
Cortex  is a multi-layered large zone made of thin-walled oval or 
rounded loosely arranged cells with intercellular spaces. It stores 
food and water. 
Endodermis  is the innermost layer of the cortex, made of barrel-
shaped closely packed cells. The layer helps the movement of water 
and dissolved nutrients from the cortex into the xylem.
Pericycle  is a single layer inner to endodermis. It is the site of origin 
of lateral roots.
Vascular bundles  consist of xylem and phloem with meristematic 
(cambium)  or actively dividing cells between them
Pith is present in young roots while absent in old roots.
ACTIVITY 2.6: COMPARATIVE TABLE 
Direction:
• Follow the direction stated in activity 2.6, but this time you will 
draw and label the internal structure of monocot root in your 
exercise book. 
• Complete the following table of comparison to show the 
differences between the internal structure of dicot and monocot 
root. The column under dicot is filled to you for reference
Dicot root Monocot 
root 
 The cortex area is narrow 
Vascular bundles limited in number between 
2 – 6
Pith is either extremely small or absent  
Show secondary growth due to the presence of 
cambium
Figure 2.6 Internal structure of 
a typical dicot root   
In Grade 9, you have 
learned that one of the 
unifying principles in 
Biology is complimentary 
of structure and function i. 
e, a particular structure is 
best suited for a particular 
function. Explain how leaf 
and root of a plant can be 
described with this unifying 
principle.Self Test
https://www.visiblebody.
com/learn/biology/
monocot-dicot/roots
25
Grade 10 Biology 25Unit Two: Plants2.4 Reproduction in plants  
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
•	draw	and	label	floral	parts, 	
• outline the reproductive cycle /pattern  of non – flowering and 
flowering plants ,
•	list	different	types	of	pollinating	agents	and	
•	appreciate	the		diversity	in	floral	colour		to	attract	pollinatorsObjectives
2.4.1 Reproductive structure and life cycle of non-flowering 
plants   
In this section, you will learn the reproductive structure and life cycle 
of higher seed-bearing non–flowering plants known as gymnosperms. 
Figure 2.7 shows common gymnosperm trees in Ethiopia and 
reproductive structure, male and female cones, of pine tree.  These 
higher plants belong to a group of gymnosperms known as conifers.
  
Figure 2.7 Common gymnosperms and reproductive cones 
ACTIVITY 2.7 : FIELD VISIT 
• Arrange a field visit with small groups (3 to 4 students) to a park or 
recreational places or street gardens during your weekend. Look for 
gymnosperm trees, particularly indigenous trees such as Podocarpus 
falcatus (“Zigba “) and Juniperus procera (“Tid”).  You can also look 
for gymnosperm shrub, which is used as a hedge grown in a row 
and used for partition in gardens. 
• If you have a smart phone, take picture of the gymnosperm tree to 
share with your classmates. 
• Take note on the external structure of the gymnosperm tree you 
encountered with special attention on the nature of leaf and the 
cones (if there are any). Collect some leaf and the cones and bring 
them to class as specimen for class discussion.
• Ask your elders or parents about the reproduction and economic 
importance of gymnosperm trees and prepare a report to submit to 
your teacher for whole class discussion. How do non – flowering 
and flowering plants 
reproduce? 
Think of a fruit bearing 
plants like “Avocado” 
or “Papaya”. Collect 
information about these 
fruits and point out 
the stages of their life 
cycle starting from the 
matured plant.  
Male  Cone Podocarpus Tree Female Cone Juniperus tree
Most conifers have narrow, 
needle shaped leaves with 
thick cuticle, which enable 
them to live in extremely 
cold and hot environments.  
They are evergreen  and 
do not shade their leaves 
both in winter and summer, 
a feature which makes 
them to be ornamental 
plants decorating parks, 
recreational areas and streets 
in town and big cities.Attention
26
Grade 10 Biology 26Unit Two: PlantsAfter the field visit and preparation of the field report, you are now 
able to distinguish and describe gymnosperms. In this lesson, you 
will learn the life cycle of gymnosperm, using the pine tree as a 
typical representative of conifers as well as gymnosperms in general.
As shown in Figure 2.8 the pine tree has male and female cones 
on one plant. Initially, pollen is transferred from the male cone to 
the female cone. The process is called pollination and occurs with 
the help of wind. Following pollination, the pollen completes its 
germination and produces the male gamete inside the female cone. 
The female gamete is also produced in the female cone. Here, the 
male and female gametes fuse (unite) and form a zygote. This process 
is known as fertilization. 
A zygote develops into a seed embryo inside the female cone. After 
the seed is matured, it is liberated upon drying and opening of the 
female cone. Then the seed will be dispersed or scattered away from 
the parent plant and germinates into a seedling (young pine plant) 
upon getting favorable conditions. Finally, the young plant grows 
and develops in to mature plant with female and male cones and the 
reproductive cycle of the pine tree is complete. 
ACTIVITY 2.8 COOPERATIVE LEARNING
Carefully read the description on the reproductive cycle of a pine 
tree.  Share ideas with a friend sitting next to you and list down 
developmental stage denoted by numbers (1 to 6) in  Figure 2.8  to 
show  major stages of  gymnosperms’  life cycle in general. 
 
2.4.2 Reproductive structure and life cycle of flowering plants 
A flower is the reproductive organ of angiosperms, plants with seeds 
covered by or contained in a fruit. Figure 2.9 illustrates a typical 
flower has four floral parts, namely Sepals, Petals, Stamen, and Pisti. 
Sepals  ( calyx) – usually green leaf-like structure  protecting  the 
lower part of female and male parts
Petals  (corolla) – mostly  brightly coloured  and attract pollinating 
agents like insects 
Stamen  (Androecium) – is the male part, consisting of the filament 
and bilobed anther 
Pistil  ( Gynoecium or carpel) – is the female part, consisting of the 
ovary with ovules, style and stigma.
Figure 2.8 Life cycle of a pine 
tree representing gymnosperms 
What is flower?  What are the major  floral  parts and their role 
in reproduction ?
A complete flower has the 
four floral parts. It is called 
incomplete flower if it does 
not have any one of the 
floral parts.
A perfect flower has both 
stamen and pistil. If a flower 
does not have either stamen 
or pistil, it is known as 
imperfect flower. It is either 
pistilated (has pisitil and no 
stamen), or staminated (has 
stamen but no pistil) flower. AttentionHave you ever thought 
that removing a 
flower is depriving its 
opportunity to reproduce 
or substitute itself? What 
does this mean for plants 
with solitary (single 
flower)?. 
27
Grade 10 Biology 27Unit Two: Plants
Figure 2.9:  Structure of typical flower 
2.4.3 Pollination
This is the transfer of pollen grains from the anther of a stamen to 
the stigma of the pistil. The transfer can be between stamen and pistil 
on one flower or between flowers on one plant (Self Pollination) 
or between two flowers on different plants (cross-pollination). 
Pollination requires pollinating agents such as insects or wind. There 
is a strong relationship between the nature of the flower and the 
pollinating agents. 
Following pollination, a flowering plant passes through distinct 
stages   described  as follows and illustrated in Figure 2.10. An imperfect flower is 
incomplete flower, but an 
incomplete flower may or 
may not be an imperfect 
flower. Explain how this is 
so?Self Test
ACTIVITY 2.9   COOPERATIVE  LEARNING   
• Let one group of five students from each class bring one complete 
flower and another group of five students incomplete flower, 
without harming the plant from your school campus or your 
locality. Put your flowers in a plastic bag  and bring them to your 
class for your group work
• In the class room students should carefully examine the 
complete flower. They should identify the different floral parts by 
comparing the real flowers to Figure 2.9. Then students draw and 
label the parts, focus in on the male part (stamen) and female 
part (pistil) in your exercise book. 
• Let students look at the incomplete flower and identify the 
part (s) missed. Ask students if the flower is incomplete and 
imperfect? Why did they say so?
• During collection, students will observe that some flowers are 
bright in colour while the others are not.  Which floral part is so 
bright with colour and how does this be related to  pollinating 
agents? 
What is pollination ?
28
Grade 10 Biology 28Unit Two: PlantsPollen  tube formation  
Pollen grains landing on the stigma will form pollen tubes that grow 
down in the style and form the male gamete as it approaches the 
ovule.   
Fertilization
This is the union of the male gamete and the female gamete, occurring 
in the ovule within the ovary. As a result, a zygote that develops into 
a seed embryo will be formed 
Seed and fruit formation 
Following fertilization and formation of seed embryo, the ovule 
matures into seed while the ovary matures into a fruit. Thus seed is a 
matured ovule while the fruit is a matured ovary. 
Seed dispersal 
This is a mechanism of scattering seeds around or away from the 
parent plant. Seed dispersal like pollination requires agents such as 
animals or wind.
Seed dormancy /Seed germination
The fate of a seed landing at a certain place will be either dormancy 
or germination. A dormant seed is inactive and waiting for the 
favourable condition to start germination.  If there is enough water 
and nutrients the seed will break dormancy and the seed embryo 
starts to develop into a seedling (Young and new plant). This process 
is called seed germination.  
 ACTIVITY 2.10   LIBRARY 
SEARCH  
• Refer to books or browse 
on the internet  and 
prepare a table of summary  
that shows the difference 
between insect-pollinated 
flowers and wind-
pollinated flowers
• Show your table  of 
summary to your teacher 
for comment  
Figure 2.10 Life cycle of typical 
flowering plant (angiosperm) 
29
Grade 10 Biology 29Unit Two: Plants2.5 Seeds  
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
•	describe		the	structure	of	seed		and		embryo		and	
•	list	down	the	difference	between	dicot	and	monocot	seed		Objectives
The seed (fertilized ovule) contains three parts: the seed embryo, 
cotyledon/endosperm (reserve food) and seed coat. In Angiosperms, 
the seed is additionally covered by the fruit. Thus it is called covered 
seed as opposed to the naked seed of gymnosperm. A naked seed has 
nothing on except its own seed coat.
The seed embryo, in turn, consists of the radicle (future root), epicotyl, 
hypocotyl and the plumule (future shoot) (Fig. 2.11). Cotyledon and 
endosperm are food storing tissues, essential for the seed embryo 
(future plant) until it forms leaf and starts manufacturing its own 
food. A seed of angiosperm may have one cotyledon (monocot) or 
two cotyledons (dicot).
Figure 2.11 Section of a dicot (Bean) and monocot (Corn/Maize) seed 
and the associated structures.
Table 2.1 Differences between dicot and monocot seeds 
Dicot  seed Monocot  seed
Two cotyledons are present in the 
embryo Only one cotyledon present 
Cotyledons are fleshy and store 
food materials Cotyledon is very thin and lacks 
food materials 
Endosperm is absent Endosperm is large and well 
developed 
Primary root produced from the 
radicle bears many lateral roots. Primary root formed from rad -
icle is replaced by adventitious 
fibrous rootsWhat  makes seeds of 
flowering plants to be 
different  from those  of 
gymnosperms ?
An imperfect flower is 
incomplete flower, but an 
incomplete flower may or 
may not be an imperfect 
flower. 
Explain how this is so?Self Test
30
Grade 10 Biology 30Unit Two: Plants2.6 Seed dispersal and germination 
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
•	relate	nature	of	seeds	with	the	mechanism		of	dispersal, 	
•	explain	the	process	of	seed	germination	and	
•	conduct	 experiment		 that	demonstrates	 the	germination	 of	seedObjectives
2.6.1 Seed dispersal 
At the beginning of unit 2, under section 2.1, you have learned that 
plants are sessile or fixed at one place. However, plants at their seed 
stage display long-distance mobility and they do so with the help 
of seed dispersal agents. Seed dispersal is an adaptive mechanism 
of plants that ensures seed will be separated from the parent plants 
distributed over a large area to safeguard the germination and survival 
of the seeds to adult plants,  thereby minimizing overcrowding at one 
place.  
Seeds can be dispersed by animals, wind or water. For instance, 
fleshy fruits that have seeds in them can be ingested by birds and due 
to hard seed coats, the seeds escape digestion and are dropped at a 
distance upon defecation. Seeds that have additional hairy or winged 
structures can be dispersed by wind or float in water and taken away 
to a new habitat. 
ACTIVITY 2.5  LIBRARY WORK  
• Attempt the following activity with a friend sitting next to you. 
• Carefully read the description on the nature of the seed or look at the picture of seeds included in 
the next  table  and infer the mechanism of dispersal.
• Finally, write the conclusion that you can arrive  with regard to the nature of seed and mechanism of 
dispersal  
Nature of seed Mechanism of dispersal 
 Seeds that stick or cling to fur or clothes
Seeds within fruits act as kites or propellersIs seed alive or dead? 
How can you know this?
What is the importance 
of seed dispersal ?
31
Grade 10 Biology 31Unit Two: Plants2.6.2 Gemination of seed
The life of a flowering plant starts with a tiny seed embryo that stays 
dormant until the essential conditions for active growth are fulfilled. 
The resumption of active growth of the embryo after a period of 
dormancy is known as germination. 
There are three essential conditions for seed germination. 
Water (moisture)
Water is important for the germinating seed because the hydration 
of the seed coat increases its permeability to O2. Water is essential 
for the enzymatic hydrolysis of organic food and acts as an agent of 
transport in the translocation of soluble substances. 
Oxygen ( Aeration)
Oxygen is necessary for aerobic respiration by which the seeds get 
energy for the growth of the embryo. 
Temperature (warmth)
Seeds require optimum temperature for germination.  
How do we demonstrate that moisture, air and warmth are required 
for seed germination? The following experimental activity will 
answer this question.What are the essential 
conditions for seed 
germination?
ACTIVITY 2.12: GROUP ACTIVITY  
Materials required: Bean seeds, oil, cotton, water, beakers, short wooden bar, glue  ( to fix seeds on the 
wooden bar) 
Direction:
Carefully look at the experiment designed to show what is required for seed germination. You may do 
the experiment individually at home to confirm the results indicated
Note that the beakers should be placed where they get sunlight (light and heat).   The seeds  are allowed 
to germinate, waiting up to 2–3 days 
• Discuss  the results with your 
small group and answer the 
following  questions 
• Identify the experiment that 
shows the need for optimum 
moisture (water),  temperature 
(warmth) and air (oxygen) 
respectively 
• What is the importance of the 
oil layer in experiment 2? 
• What does the three-bean seeds 
experiment demonstrate? 
32
Grade 10 Biology 32Unit Two: PlantsAs depicted in Figure 2.12, seed germination covers all the processes 
that occur from the time that seed embryo starts growth up to the 
formation of young independent plant with photosynthetic leaves.
Optimum moisture, air and warmth activate the embryo to start 
growth. With more and more nourishment from the food stored 
in cotyledon and endosperm, the tiny embryo grows more.  The 
outward sign of growth is a radicle that develops from the hypocotyl. 
It is the first to come out of the seed and grow down to the soil as the 
primary root. The root is essential for anchorage and access to water 
and nutrients from the soil. Meanwhile, the shoot that develops from 
the plumule grows upward towards sunlight. Soon, a young plant 
(seedling) with photosynthetic leaf start manufacturing its own food 
 
Figure 2.12. Epigeal and Hypogeal germination
Plants show the highest mobility during seed dispersal, but  the 
movement is not as we see in animals. ExplainSelf Test• It is the  position and 
fate of cotyledon which 
differentiate hypogeal 
germination from epi -
geal germination
• In epigeal germina -
tion, the cotyledon is 
pushed up to become 
the photosynthetic sur -
face of the seedling by 
the elongation of a re -
gion of the embryo. 
• In hypogeal germina -
tion, the cotyledon re -
mains  under the soilAttention
33
Grade 10 Biology 33Unit Two: Plants2.7 Photosynthesis 
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
• identify inputs and outputs of  photosynthesis, 
• outline the process  or  mechanism by which food is synthesized 
in green plants,
• recognize the importance of photosynthesis to life  and
• appreciate  leaves of green plants in their function as food  
factoriesObjectives
Do you know that the leaves of green plants are the largest food factories 
on Earth? The product of leaves together with the photosynthetic 
productivity of algae provides food that supports nearly all life on 
earth.  Plants can prepare their own food by photosynthesis. Thus 
they are called producers or autotrophs (self-feeding). Besides 
making food for themselves, plants produce excess food for the vast 
consumers known as heterotrophs (feeding on plants and on one 
another).
The basic source of energy that sustains life begins with sunlight. 
In turn, sunlight is absorbed by a green pigment known as 
chlorophyll. Thus, it occurs in organisms bearing chlorophyll 
such as green algae and higher plants, which enables them to trap 
solar energy and transform it into chemical energy. This process is 
known as photosynthesis. In this section, you will learn more about 
photosynthetic apparatus - Chloroplast 
2.7.1 The photosynthetic apparatus   
You have learned, in sub-topic 2.3.1 of this unit, that the mesophyll 
layer of the leaf contains the largest number of chloroplasts and is 
in the best position to trap the maximum amount of solar energy.  
Figure 2.13 illustrates the internal structure of the chloroplast, which 
is termed as photosynthetic apparatus.
Accordingly, there are two distinct parts in chloroplasts: Granum 
and Stroma. 
i) Granum:  consists of stacks of flattened sacks, each of which is called 
thylakoid. The granum contains the chlorophyll, enzymes and co-
factors that participate in the light trapping phase of photosynthesis. 
It is here that the light reaction takes place.
ii) Stroma:  is a gel-like colourless matrix, which is a site for sugar 
(carbohydrate) synthesis through carbon fixation. It is from the sugar 
produced in the stroma that is directly or indirectly converted to all 
organic compounds  (including amino acids, proteins and lipids) 
virtually found in all organisms.It is amazing that plants 
that are fixed at one 
place make their own 
food , while animals that 
move from place to place 
cannot synthesize food 
and depend on plants. 
Why is this so?
What do plants provide 
to animals other than 
food? 
What do animals give to 
plants?
Where does 
photosynthesis take 
place?
34
Grade 10 Biology 34Unit Two: Plants    
Figure 2.13:  Chloroplast – the photosynthetic apparatus 
2.7.2 The light  absorbing system in chloroplast 
In this sub section you will learn   the role of   light absorbing 
pigments, mainly chlorophyll and sunlight absorbed serves as agent 
of photochemical reaction in food synthesis  (photosynthesis). 
The chloroplast contains chlorophyll (particularly chlorophyll a and 
b) and other light absorbing accessory pigments capable of absorbing 
light at different wavelengths.  As shown in Figure 2.14, the light 
absorbing pigments of chloroplasts absorb most of the visible light, 
ranging from 400 – 700 nm.  Maximum light absorption occurs at 
wavelengths from 400 – 500 nm and 600 – 700 nm, blue and red light 
respectively.  Light ranging from 500 to 600nm that includes green 
light is not absorbed, it is rather reflected. This is the reason why 
leaves look green.
Figure 2.14 The action spectrum for different wavelengths  
How is the structure of 
chloroplast best suited 
for its function? 
35
Grade 10 Biology 35Unit Two: Plants2.73. Mechanism of  photosynthesis
Photosynthesis consists of a number of photochemical and enzymatic 
reaction. It is the sum total of the following two sub reaction
1. Light reaction  this is also known as the light dependent stage, It 
takes place in the granum, where the light absorbing system – mainly 
chlorophyll occurs.  Here, the granum is organized as Photosystems 
and Electron Transporting System.  The photosystem consists of 
chlorophyll that absorbs sunlight maximally at blue and red range of 
light spectrum. The light  absorbed by the  chlorophyll will 
• split of water molecules (H 2O) into H+ and O 2. This is known 
as photolysis. The O 2 is released to the atmosphere through leaf 
stomata.
• excite some electrons in the chlorophyll  molecule to higher 
energy level  which pass down the ETS and  generate high energy 
ATP molecule. The ATP and H+ harvested during light reaction 
will be used as an input in the Stroma where  conversion of CO2   
to carbohydrate takes place.     
2. Dark reaction  this is also known as light – independent stage, 
because it can occur in the absence of light as long as there is 
sufficient amount of H+ and ATP supplied from the light reaction. 
The dark reaction and enzymatic reaction H+ indirectly combines 
with CO 2, in the stroma of chloroplast. The process is   known as 
carbon fixation. Glucose (carbohydrate) is the immediate result of 
the dark reaction.
The overall chemical reaction of photosynthesis can be summed up 
in the following equation
 
   6CO2 + 6H20                                      C6H12O6  +  6O2 Chlorophyll 
Sunlight  
2.7.4. Testing a leaf for starch
A simple way of demonstrating food synthesis in leaves is testing a 
leaf for starch. You can easily see the effect of iodine on starch, if 
you put iodine solution on powdered starch, piece of bread or potato 
slice a blue-black colour will develop confirming the presence of 
starch. However, the cuticle of the leaf is impermeable to iodine. 
Moreover, the leaf has green pigment chlorophyll that interferes with 
the colouring effect of iodine. The next experiment will enable what 
you should do to solve these two problems before testing the leaf for 
starch.ACTIVITY 2.13: PEER DIS -
CUSSION 
Direction:
Discuss  on the sub reactions 
and over all equation of 
photosynthesis   with a 
friend sitting next to you. 
Then, answer the questions 
written hereunder. Compare 
your answers to your 
classmates’ answer 
• What is the source of 
oxygen? 
• What are the inputs 
(reactants) and 
outputs (products) of 
photosynthesis?
• Point out the importance 
of water  with regard to 
food that we eat and air 
we breathe   
36
Grade 10 Biology 36Unit Two: Plants2.8 Transport in plant
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
• identify routes of water, mineral, and organic matter  transport 
in plants,
• discuss the mechanism  of  transport in plants,
• tell   the importance of transport in plants  and 
• demonstrate water transport in plants using simple experiments Objectives
2.8.1 Transporting systems in plants 
You know that higher plants have a green leaf that is capable of 
photosynthesis. But, do you know the route through which the raw 
materials, water and minerals, move from roots to leaves and how 
food manufactured from the leaves reach the rest of the plant?  This 
will be clear after   you learn about the transporting vessels of higher 
plants commonly called vascular bundles. 
Figure 2.15 illustrates the arrangement of the two transporting 
vessels, xylem and phloem in the root. They are collectively known 
as vascular bundles. Water and minerals are transported from the 
root to the leaf via the stem through conducting vessel known as How are different 
materials, such as 
water, mineral and food 
transported to and from 
different parts of the 
plant such as root, stem 
and leaf?   
What are the routes of 
material transport in 
plants?
ACTIVITY 2.14: TESTING LEAF FOR STARCH   
Materials required:  fresh green leaf, beaker, heat source ( Bunsen burner or electric stove), test tube, 
alcohol,  iodine solution
Procedure  
• Depending on the availability of the materials required, you can perform the experiment in a 
group or follow your teacher when the experiment is demonstrated in class.
• Follow the experimental design illustrated hereunder and write the purpose of each step (Steps 1 – 
4). 
• For the sake of safety use forceps to put the leaf into or take it out from beakers with boiling water 
and hot alcohol.  
What is the danger that can possibly happen in step 2 if you do not first turn off the Bunsen burner?
37
Grade 10 Biology 37Unit Two: Plantsxylem, which    consists of elongated dead cells, joined end to end to 
form continuous vessels. On the other hand, organic matter (food) 
manufactured in the leaf is transported to the rest of as opposed to 
xylem, phloem consists of living cells arranged end to end and allows 
transport of food (sucrose and amino acids) up and down the plant. 
This is called translocation. In general, it happens between where 
these substances are made (Sources) and where they are used or 
stored (the sinks). 
 
             
Figure 2.15 Root vascular bundles 
Do you know why the stem of sugar cane or stem tuber of sweet 
potato is so sweet?  Sugars synthesized in the leaf is converted to 
starch and accumulated in the storage organs of plants, such as root 
and stem tubers, leaves, seeds and fruits of a plant. We, human beings 
take advantage of food in these storage organs. Starch from plants is 
a good source of energy that we need in our diet.
ACTIVITY 2.15: GROUP WORK    
Hint
Water is a raw material for photosynthesis. Water is badly required at 
the seedling stage as it gives strength to the plant. A young seedling 
is delicate and easily wilts if there is a scarcity of water or loss of 
water by evaporation.    
Direction   
• Discuss with your small group how drought affects agricultural 
productivity or food production.
• Why are rainy months the best time for agriculture? Why is 
irrigation needed, particularly during drought or in dry areas?
38
Grade 10 Biology 38Unit Two: Plants2.8.2 Mechanism of transport in plant 
i. Uptake of water and minerals 
Water from the soil first enters the root through root hairs. These 
are elongated single cells that provide a large surface area allowing 
more water to enter into the root. Minerals also enter the root 
together with the water. This process is known as absorption. Water 
entering the root passes from cell to cell either by osmosis across 
the cell membrane and cytoplasm or freely flow by diffusion along 
the porous cell wall. Thus, water passes passively (without spending 
additional energy from the cell) across the root cells and reaches the 
root xylem (Figure 2.16). 
Water in the root xylem is pulled upward passively by transpiration 
pull. This is pulling force caused by transpiration ; it is the main 
force responsible for the water passing all the way from the root to 
the leaves through the xylem vessel. During transpiration water that 
evaporates from the leaves serve as a mechanism to pull or drag water 
from the root. 
Figure 2.16 Transport of water and minerals from root  to the leaf  via 
the stem 
Minerals enter the root in the ionic (charged) form either passively 
or actively. They are taken actively (cell spends energy) when 
concentration is higher in plant cell than outside the cell and, 
therefore accumulation of salts or their ions occur as a result of  active 
transport against a concentration gradient.
39
Grade 10 Biology 39Unit Two: Plantsii. Translocation of organic matter (food)
Translocation in plants is a shift or transport of food from the site 
of synthesis (source), which is the leaf, to the site of utilization or 
storage (sink), which can be either the stem or the root. Translocation 
occurs through the phloem, which is made up of living cells.  It is an 
active transport, where the living phloem cells use energy obtained 
by metabolic process.
The ringing or girdling experiment as designed in Figure 2.17 helps 
to identify the food conducting vessels.  The experiment involves 
removing the ring of bark with the phloem and the plant is placed in 
a beaker of water.  Xylem will be the only vessel in the girdled area, 
which connects the upper and lower part of the plant. After few days, 
a swelling will be observed in the upper girdle. This is   due to the 
accumulation of food materials, mainly sugar which was translocated 
from the photosynthesizing leaf towards the root. The sugar can be 
sucked with syringe or using aphids and can be confirmed with food 
test.  Aphids are soft – bodied insects that use piercing and sucking 
mouth parts to feed on phloem sap.ACTIVITY 2.16: COLOURED CELERY  EXPERIMENT  
Have you ever wondered how water rises upward in the stem towards the leaf? You can see how this 
happens in the following home experiment.   You can do it alone or with your pair in class. 
• All you should do is to repeat the classic dyed celery experiment that shows water rises up in the 
stem and how transpiration helps to suck up water.  The celery plant is a leafy small plant with a 
transparent stalk or stem. You can use any other plant with a similar feature as long as it is available 
in your locality  
• Cut your celery stem diagonally  to provide a large surface  area for the coloured water to pass 
through    (like as it is done to put the fresh flower into a vase)
• Take photographs or make observational drawings  of the celery appearance initially
• Put Beaker “A” in dark place (fully sheltered), Beaker “B” in partially sheltered place and Beaker “C” 
where there is a bright sunlight. Leave the beakers for some time (4 to 6 hours).
• Again take photographs or make observational drawings  and compare  the initial  and final result 
• Write a short report on dyed celery experiment and what has been demonstrated. Prepare yourself 
for class presentation as you may be randomly invited by your teacher for class presentation.
A C B
How can we demonstrate 
that  food transport 
occurs through phloem ?
Figure 2.17 Ringing /Girdling 
experiment 
40
Grade 10 Biology 40Unit Two: PlantsRinging will ultimately kill the plant, because of disruption of food 
transport through the phloem. The root dies first, because supply of 
food to the root will be discontinued. As the root dies, the upper part 
and finally the whole plant, which depends on root for water and 
minerals, will die. 
2.9 Response in plants 
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
• recognize  that plants are capable of giving response 
• explain some common responses in plant 
• tell   the importance response in plants  and
• demonstrate response  in plants using simple experiments Objectives
2.9.1 Tropism as growth response  
In section 2.1 of this unit, you learned that plants like other living things 
share basic characteristics. One of their important characteristics is 
to respond to stimuli, that is, changes in the environment. In this 
section, you will learn mainly tropism, how plants respond to light 
(phototropism), water (hydrotropism) and gravity (geotropism). 
Thus, we will deal with these three common and useful tropisms.
Tropism  is bending towards (positive response) or opposite (negative 
response) to the direction of the stimulus. The cause of the response 
is a unilateral stimulus (coming from one side only), which causes 
unequal production or distribution of growth hormone resulting 
in unequal growth.  This means one side grows more or less than 
the other side and these results in bending towards or away from 
the stimulus. Tropism is exhibited by the shoot and root of a plant 
due to unequal concentration of growth hormone, commonly auxin, 
resulting in unequal growth.
Auxin , particularly Indole Acetic Acid (IAA), is plant growth 
hormone. It is produced at the tips of shoot and root. It is transported 
to the region of active growth and affects cell elongation, Shoot and 
roots respond differently to different auxin concentration.  Figure 
2.18  helps to know  how  shoots and  roots respond differently  to 
unilateral ( one sided) stimulus  The graph ( Figure 2.18)  shows  that 
auxin concentration that promotes shoot growth  ( 10 -2 to 101 ppm) 
inhibits root growth . It also shows that root requires minimum auxin 
concentration, which is about  10 -4 ppm  and such concentration 
has no effect on the shoot growth.If you have potted plant 
placed near the window 
of your room, to which 
direction does the plant 
turn its shoot? Why is 
this so?
If you add water to one 
side of your potted plant, 
what do you think will 
happen to the root?   
How does auxin affect 
shoot and root growth?
41
Grade 10 Biology 41Unit Two: PlantsHow shoot and root respond to unilateral light is well demonstrated 
by Figure 2.19. As a result of   unilateral light, auxin move from 
illuminated side to shaded side of shoot and root.  In shoot higher 
auxin concentration on the shaded side causes more growth by cell 
elongation than the illuminated side. As a result, the shoot bends 
towards light.  In the mean time, more auxin on the shaded part of 
the root inhibits cell elongation as compared to the illuminated side. 
Thus, root bends away from light. 
Phototropism
Plants need sunlight for photosynthesis. Phototropism is a plant 
response to light, mainly exhibited by the shoot. The tips of the plant 
shoot bend towards the side where there is sunlight. Thus shoot is 
positively phototropic. The earliest experiment on phototropism was 
conducted by Charles Darwin, “father of evolution” , (Figure 2.20). He 
noticed that if the light is shone on a coleoptile (shoot tip of young 
seedling) from one side, the shoot bends or curves (grows) toward 
the light (Seedling ‘1’ and partially seedling ‘4’). The bending did not 
occur in the tip itself but in the elongating part just below.
When the tip is removed (Seedling ‘2’) or covered with opaque foil What is the response of 
the shoot to unilateral   
(one - sided) light ?
Figure 2.18  Effects of auxin 
concentrations on the growth 
of shoots and roots 
Figure 2.19 How unilateral light 
affects shoot and root response 
42
Grade 10 Biology 42Unit Two: Plants(Seedling ‘3’), the shoot could no longer bend toward the light. 
Moreover, covering the lower shoot part (Seedling ‘5’) did not 
affect the response to light at all. Based on his experiment, Darwin 
concluded that “some influence is transmitted from the tip to the 
more basal regions of the shoot thereby regulating growth and 
inducing curvature or bending” . At present, it is well known that it is 
a growth hormone known as auxin that will be distributed more on 
the tip side opposite to light. This causes more growth on the shaded 
side and curving will occur toward the light.  
Figure 2.20 Darwin’s experiment on phototropism
Hydrotropism 
The survival of terrestrial plants depends upon the capacity of roots 
to obtain water and nutrients from the soil. Roots search for and grow 
toward water because it is needed for photosynthesis and to support 
cell structure (make them turgid and strong). Thus, hydrotropism 
exhibited by root is biologically important and vital for  the survival 
of plants.  
ACTIVITY 2.18: Demonstration of hydrotropism 
Procedure   
Take two beakers – “A” and “B” . Follow the picture below and add moist soil 
and sow the seed in Beaker “A” . In beaker “B” add dry soil in half part and 
moist soil in another part and sow the seeds. keep both beakers  for 2–3 days 
for germination to take place
Questions
1. How do you explain what you observed in Beaker “A” and “B”?
2. If you had filled the whole beaker with dry soil and put wet cotton or wet 
sponge on the top of the soil at one side, how would the root have grown? 
Downward (toward gravity) or upward (against gravity)?  Is the root 
response stronger, for water or gravity? [ You need to do the experiment in 
order to answer these questions ]
ACTIVITY 2.17: Experiment 
on  phototropism   
Materials required 
•  Two pots, soil, bean seeds, 
dark cloth, hard paper box 
(cartoon)
Procedure 
• Germinate some bean 
seeds in two different pots 
• Prepare a hard box and 
cover it with light proof  
dark cloth and make a 
small round hole on one 
side 
• When the shoots are about 
6cm, put one pot in the 
dark box, and the other   
pot open   (without the 
box).
• Leave both pots in a well 
illuminated (with light ) 
place 
• After 2–3 days observe 
what has happened to the 
seedlings in the two pots
• Write your conclusion  and 
prepare a short report on 
the experiment  
What is the effect of 
water on root growth ?
43
Grade 10 Biology 43Unit Two: PlantsGeotropism
You have learned that the seed embryo that develops into a seedling 
will form root from the radicle and shoot from the plumule. The 
most fascinating phenomena are how the seedling (young plant) 
stands erect (Figure 2.21).  This is the result of a response to gravity, 
known as geotropism. The root progressively bends downward while 
the shoot bends upward until root–shoot system orient itself in an 
upright (standing position), when there is a uniform effect of gravity. 
As shown in Figure 2.22, a horizontally placed seedling responds 
to gravity in that its root is positively geotropic (grow downward or 
towards gravity) and shoot is negatively geotropic (grow upward or 
against gravity).
ACTIVITY 2.15: GROUP WORK    
Materials required 
 Bean seeds  , Blotting /soft paper, Petridish 
Procedure 
• Germinate some bean seeds placed on wet blotting paper  in a 
petridish  
• When the radicles and plumules emerged, arrange the seedling 
in to two different position. Place some seedlings in a horizontal 
position and others vertically with the radicle facing upwards. 
• Leave the set up for 2 to 3 days in the dark to eliminate the effect 
of light.
• Observe what happens to the direction of growth of the radicles 
and plumules;
• Make careful drawing. Note what the experiment verified as to the 
effect of gravity on shoot and root growth.
The effect of gravity in a horizontally placed seedling can be 
overcome by a clinostat, which is a rotating instrument. A seedling 
fixed horizontally in a rotating clinostat grows straight (Figure 2.23), 
because the rotation overcome (gravity acts equally for all sides) the 
effect of gravity.  You can see the effect of rotation by using another 
seedling fixed to the clinostat but not rotated as a control. 
Figure 2.21   Seed embryo 
developing into a seedling in an 
upright positionWhat is the effect of gravity on shoot and root  growth at 
seedling? stage? 
Figure 2.22 Plant responses to 
gravity   
How can we overcome the effect of gravity on root and shoot 
growth of a seedling?
Figure 2.23 Effect of clinostat on 
gravity (geotropism)
What will happen to a 
plant if it does not exhibit 
phototropism, hydrotropism 
and geotropism?Self Test
44
Grade 10 Biology 44Unit Two: Plants2.10 Medicinal plants 
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
•	tell	the	importance	of	medicinal	plants	and	
•	list		down	locally	available	medicinal	plants	Objectives
From sub-topic 2.7 of this unit, you learned that plants synthesize 
a variety of organic products that have food value. But, plants also 
produce other organic products that have ornamental, commercial 
and medicinal values. Here, we will focus on the medicinal plants 
that play a vital role in treating diseases and fighting infections. 
Globally, more than 60 % of the total world population depends on 
traditional or locally available plant medicines for their health care. 
(According to World Health Organization (WHO), nearly 3.5 billion 
people in developing countries including Ethiopia believe in the 
efficiency of plant medicines and widely use them to overcome their 
health problems. The list of some Ethiopian medicinal plants, parts 
used, mode of administration and some examples of human diseases 
treated are presented in table 2.3.  
Table 2.2 List of medicinal plants and disease treated  
No. Scientific name L ocal name         
( Amharic) Habit Plant part used Route of ad -
ministration Disease treated 
1. Ruta chalepensis Teenadem Herb Leaf Oral Abdominal pain
2. Zingiber officinalis Jinjibil Herb Rhizome (under -
ground stem)Oral Tonsilitis , abdominal pain, 
cough 
3. Hagenia abysinica Ye–kosso Zaf Tree Female flower 
(Seed)Oral Tapeworm
4. Artemesia absin -
thium Aritii Herb Leaf Oral Unexplained stomach ache 
(Megagna)
5. Niglella sativa Tikur Azmud Herb Seed Oral Intestinal parasites 
6. Ocimum lamifolium Damakesse Shrub Leaf Nasal Headache, General body 
illness ( Mich)
7. Rosmarinus offici -
nalis Rosmery Herb Leaf Oral Bronchial asthma. 
Prostate disorder 
inflammatory diseases
8. Cymbopogen ciratus Tejsar Herb/
GrassLeaf Oral Used for stomach complaint 
9. Alium sativum Nechshinkurt Herb bulb Oral Abdominal pain, toothache, 
tonsillitis, common cold 
10. Eucalyptus golbulus Nech–Bahir -
zaf Tree Leaf Nasal Common cold, fever with 
headache 
11. Curcurbita pepo Dubba Herb Seed Oral Tapeworm
12. Trigonella 
foenumgraecum Abish Herb Seed Oral Mixed with garlic to treat 
asthma , used to treat gas -
tritis 
13. Ocimum basilicum Besobilla Herb Leaf Oral Abdominal pain
14. Lepidium sativum Feto Herb Seed Oral Treatment of diarrhea What are medicinal 
plants? What is their 
importance to local 
people?
What is the contribution 
of medicinal plants 
and traditional healers 
(herbalists) to modern 
medicine?Self Test
45
Grade 10 Biology 45Unit Two: Plants2.11 Renowned Ethiopian Botanist 
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
•	appreciate		the	work	of		a	renowned		botanist		and	
•	look	 for	more	 Ethiopian	 Botanists	 who	 contributed	 a	lot	to	plant	
scienceObjectives
Sebsebe Demissew is a professor of Plant systematics and 
Biodiversity at Addis Ababa University and Executive Director of 
the Gullele Botanic Garden in Addis Ababa.  He was awarded the 
Kew international medal in 2016. Professor Sebsebe Demissew, a 
leading Ethiopian botanical scientist, has been elected as a Foreign 
Member of the Royal Society in London in 2018 for his lifelong work 
on promoting Ethiopian biodiversity. He is the first Sub – Saharan 
African scientist to be elected in the Society’s 357 – year history. 
In 2021, Professor Sebsebe  was awarded the “Cuatrcases Medal” for 
Excellence in Tropical Botany by the Smitheonian National Museum 
of Natural History “ , USA, for his lifetime works in conserving and 
recording the very diverse Ethiopian flora with many endemic species 
and leadership of the Ethiopian flora project  and the Ethiopian 
National Herbarium at Addis Ababa University.ACTIVITY  2.20: Group work     
Procedure
Divide the following local medicinal plants among your small group.
•	Lippia	adoensis		(“ Kosseret”) 
•	Thymus	schimperi	 (“Tossign”) 
•	Echinos	kebericho	 (“Kebericho”) 
•	Taverniera	abyssinica	 (“Dingetegna”)
•	Moringa	stenopetala	 (“Shiferaw”	or	“Aleko”)		
Ask your parents or elders in your locality about  parts  of the medicinal plant used, mode of 
administration and some examples of human diseases treated
Prepare summary as it is done for the 14 medicinal plants indicated in the previous table. 
Submit your summary table to your teacher for comment  and presentation to your classmates 
Remark :
While collecting medicinal plants student need to use hand gloves (some students can be allergic to 
the plants), not taste and ingest them or inhale if they have volatile substance. It will be safe to wash 
hands after handling the plants  
Students in the pastoralist areas can form a group to collect key information and the medicinal plants   
used for livestock. They should ask their teacher for guidance  and finally present their result in class 
as summarized in table 2.2.
46
Grade 10 Biology 46Unit Two: PlantsACTIVITY  2.21  LIBRARY SEARCH      
Direction  
• Carefully read  the work of  Prof. Sebsebe and share your impression to a friend sitting  with you  
• Form a group of four students and perform team work to look for more renowned Ethiopian 
Botanists from books and /or internet. Organize a report to share to your classmates.
• Plants are living things that are multicellular, autotrophic, and sessile and exhibit both asexual and 
sexual reproduction pattern. 
• Higher plants are vascular  with well – developed root, stem  and leaf, Based on their reproductive 
system , they can be categorized as non- flowering and flowering plants
• The non – flowering, known as gymnosperms have no flowers. Instead, their reproductive organ is 
cone. Moreover, the seeds produced in their cone are without cover (naked seeds). 
•  Flowering plants, commonly known as Angiosperms, are also vascular with well-developed root, 
stem and leaves. But unlike gymnosperms, they have flowers and produce seeds within a fruit.     
• A typical angiosperm has shoot and root system in its external structure. The shoot system grows 
above the ground and   includes the organs such as stem, branches, leaves, buds and flower 
• The root system usually grows down ward into the ground. It includes the primary or tap root, lateral 
or branch roots and root hairs.
• The internal structure of a leaf consists two layers, namely the outer layer (upper and lower epider -
mis) and the inner or middle layer. The epidermis contains cuticle and stomata, to minimize water 
loss and allow gas exchange respectively. 
• The middle layer consists of the palisade and mesophyll cells that are contain chlorophyll to absorb 
sunlight. They also contain vascular bundles to transport water, minerals and food.
• The internal structure of a stem consists of different layers including epidermis, hypodermis, cortex, 
endodermis   and pith.
• A cross-section of a root shows different layers, namely epiblema, cortex, endodermis, pericycle, 
vascular bundles and pith.  
• The sexual reproduction of an angiosperm starts with pollination, followed by the fusion of gametes, 
which results in a zygote. The zygote develops into a seed embryo within a seed (matured ovule). 
Then seed will be dispersed away from the parent plant by animals, wind and water.  
• Seed undergoes germination if it gets optimum moisture, warmth and nutrients. 
• The ultimate source of energy that sustains life comes from the sun. Chlorophyll bearing algae and 
higher plants trap solar energy and transform it into chemical energy. 
• The process of photosynthesis is the result of light absorbed by chlorophyll and other accessory 
pigments   resulting in the release of oxygen from water and in the formation of reduced carbon com -
pounds (e.g carbohydrates) from carbon dioxide.
• Transport in plants occurs through vascular bundles, xylem and phloem. Water and minerals are 
transported through the xylem while food (organic matter) is translocated through the phloem. 
• Passive transport of water occurs as a result of diffusion, osmosis and transpiration pull, while miner -
als are transported as ions passively or actively. Food transport in phloem occurs by the expenditure 
of energy (actively).
• Tropism is a common response displayed by plants. It is response unidirectional or unilateral (one-sided) 
stimulus by bending towards (positive tropism) or away (negative tropism). 
• Phototropism, hydrotropism and geotropism are a response to light, water and gravity respectively.
• The root is positively hydrotropic and geotropic, while the shoot is positively phototropic but negatively 
hydrotropic. 
• Medicinal plants play a vital role in treating diseases and fighting infections.Unit Summary
47
Grade 10 Biology 47Unit Two: PlantsTrue – False items:  Say “True” or “False” for the following statements on your exercise book. 
1.  Cone is reproductive structure of fruit bearing plants.
2.  CO 2 is used in the stroma of the chloroplast.
3.  A root hair is single cell.
4.  Self pollination is possible in imperfect flower.
Multiple choice items: Choose the correct answer from A – D and write on your exercise book.
1. Which structure transports water to the leaf of a plant?
 A) Guard cell      B) Phloem   C) Stomata      D) Xylem 
2.  Clinostat is used in the study of 
 A) Osmosis      B) Growth movements     C) Leaf transpiration      D) Photosynthesis 
3.  Which leaf part or layer contains the largest number of chloroplasts?
            A) Epidermis      B) Palisade     C) Cortex      D) Spongy 
4.  One of the following is not major characteristics of plants 
 A) Plants are composed of many eukaryotic cells  
 B) Plants are sessile or do not show mobility 
  C) Plants are hetrotrophic in their feeding habit
  D) Plants show both sexual and asexual reproduction  
5. The two products of photosynthesis include 
 A) Carbondioxide and Oxygen       C) Carbon dioxide and water       
  B) Water and carbohydrate             D) Oxygen and Carbohydrate 
 6. Given the following  
     1= Pollination;     2 = Seed dispersal;     3 = Pollen grains germination;   
      4 = Flowering;      5 = Seed germination 
     The correct order of steps in the reproduction of a mature plant is 
 A)1, 3, 2, 4, 5                     c) 4, 2, 5, 1, 3
 B) 2, 5, 4, 1,3                      d) 4, 1, 3, 2,5    Review Questions
48
Grade 10 Biology 48Unit Two: PlantsMatching Items: Match the terms under “Column B” with the description under “Column A” .
            Column A Column B
1. May be termed as starch sheath A) Cone 
2. Cells that leave an open space in leaf epidermis B) Endodermis  
3. Give mechanical strength to the stem C) Flower 
4. Single cells best suited for absorption D) Guard cells  
5. Is  the site of origin of lateral roots E) Hypodermis
6. Reproductive structure of angiopserms F) Pericycle
G) Root hair
H) Stomata
 Short Answer Items 
1. How do you distinguish a root from an underground stem?
2. What is the difference between an incomplete flower and an imperfect flower?
3. What is the importance of rainfall to agriculture?
 4. Write the type of tropism illustrated  by the pictures below.
 
49
Grade 10 Biology 49                  
Content Learning objectives
3.1. Biochemical molecules
3.1.1. Inorganic molecules: 
water
3.1.2. Inorganic ions
3.1.3. Organic molecules
• Carbohydrates
• Lipids
• Proteins
• Nucleic acids• Identify inorganic and organic biochemical molecules 
• Explain the properties of water and its importance for life
• Discuss different inorganic ions and their contribution to the 
cell
• Classify organic molecules based on their constituent 
elements and the monomers from which they are constructed.
• Discuss the role of biological molecules in the cell structure
• Elaborate the functions of carbohydrates, proteins, lipids, and 
Nucleic acids to the body. 
• Conduct experiments to identify nutrients in different 
foodstuff
• Appreciate why Ethiopians use malting seeds to make local 
drinks (Tella, Areke)
     Unit 3: Biochemical molecules                                              
3.1. Biochemical Molecules
What are biological molecules, and how would you define them? 
Make a list of all the biological molecules you are familiar with and 
divide them into two categories: inorganic and organic. Finally, 
talk about how they affect cell structure and function. After that, do 
activity 3.1 given below.
      Unit 3: Biochemical molecules                                                At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
•	identify	inorganic	and	organic	biochemical	molecules,
•	discuss	 different	 inorganic	 ions	 and	 their	 contribution	 to	the	
cell,
•	explain	the	properties	of	water	and	its	importance	for	life. Objectives 
Grade 9 Unit 5 
nutrients 
balanced diet as a source of 
energy and healthRecall
50
Grade 10 Biology       Unit 3: Biochemical molecules                                                 
 
3.1.1 Inorganic molecule: Water
Inorganic molecules, as previously stated, do not contain carbon and 
were not created through biological means except oxides of carbon 
and carbonate ions. Certain inorganic molecules play critical roles in 
the survival of living organisms. Water is an example of an inorganic 
molecule. Section 3.1.1.1 below discusses the properties of water and 
its importance in the living system. Before reading this section, please 
answer the following question and complete activity 3.2.
3.1.1.1. The properties of water
Water is an inorganic molecule composed of two elements: hydrogen 
and oxygen. H 2O is its chemical formula. Each water molecule is 
composed of two hydrogen atoms linked to a single oxygen atom. Life 
would not exist on our planet if it did not have access to water. It is 
significant for two reasons: it is a key component of cells, accounting 
for 70 to 95 percent of the cells mass. You are around 60% water.
Water, although being a simple molecule, has some surprising 
qualities. In a water molecule, each hydrogen atom shares an electron 
pair with the oxygen atom. In the O-H bonds in water, oxygen is 
more electronegative than hydrogen. Thus, the sharing of electrons 
Our body is made up of two types of biochemical molecules: 
organic and inorganic molecules.
Biochemical molecules that do not contain both carbon and 
hydrogen are known as inorganic biochemical molecules. Many 
inorganic compounds, such as water (H 2O) and the hydrochloric 
acid (HCl) generated by your stomach, include hydrogen atoms. 
Only a few inorganic compounds, on the other hand, contain 
carbon atoms. One of such examples is carbon dioxide (CO 2).
Organic biological molecules are made up of both carbon and 
hydrogen atoms. Covalent bonds are used to make organic 
biochemical compounds in living creatures, including the human 
body. Carbon and hydrogen, respectively, are the second and third 
most abundant elements in your body. You will soon figure out how 
these two elements interact in the meals you eat, the compounds 
that make up your bodily structure, and the chemicals that keep you 
running.Attention Activity 3.1 Write the bio-
molecules
Based on the knowledge you 
have and referring to books 
and internet, write about 
1) Inorganic compounds 2) 
Organic compounds and 3) 
both inorganic and organic 
molecules contained in 
living organisms as shown 
in the chart at the left hand 
corner. Finally, your teacher 
will provide you with 
possible list of molecules. 
Activity 3.2 Group work
Form a group of 3-4 students 
and list down the properties 
of water and how these are 
related to its importance to 
life. At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
•	mention	properties	of	water,
•	discuss	the	importance	of	water	for	the	living	organisms.	 Objectives
Why water is considered 
as a biochemical 
molecule?
51
Grade 10 Biology Unit 3: Biochemical molecules                                               between H and O is unequal; the electrons are more often in the 
vicinity of the oxygen atom than hydrogen. This unequal electron 
sharing creates two electric dipoles in the water molecule with 
oxygen-bearing a partial negative charge and hydrogen bearing a 
partial positive charge.  This makes water a polar molecule (see Figure 
3.1). The polarity of water has important chemical implications 
conferring its typical properties. Another important consequence 
of the polarity of the water molecule is that water molecules attract 
one another. The partially positively charged hydrogen atom of one 
water molecule can interact with the partially negatively charged 
oxygen atoms of another molecule of water. This interaction is called 
a hydrogen bond. The hydrogen bond network of water molecules 
confers several unique properties on water that are important for 
sustaining life.
Some typical properties of water are:
1. Water as a solvent
Water is an effective solvent for ions and polar molecules (molecules 
with an unequal charge distribution, such as sugars and glycerol) 
because the water molecules (Figure 3.1) are attracted to the ions and 
polar molecules, causing them to congregate and separate (Figure 3.2).  
                                      
Figure 3.2 shows what happens when a chemical dissolves in water. 
Once a chemical is in solution, it is free to move about and react with 
other chemicals. 
  Figure 3.2 Distribution of water molecules around ions in a solution.
However, non-polar molecules such as lipids are insoluble in water 
and, if surrounded by water, tend to be pushed together by the water, 
since the water molecules are attracted to each other. 
2. High specific heat capacity
A substance’s heat capacity is the amount of heat required to raise 
its temperature by a particular amount. The specific heat capacity of 
water is the amount of heat energy necessary to raise the temperature 
of one kilogram of water by one degree Celsius. The heat capacity of What typical properties of 
water do you know?
 Figure 3.1 Structure of 
water molecule
52
Grade 10 Biology       Unit 3: Biochemical molecules                                               water is rather high. To raise the temperature of a liquid, the molecules 
must obtain energy and so move more quickly. The hydrogen bonds 
that cause water molecules to adhere together make it difficult for 
the molecules to move freely; the ties must be broken to allow free 
mobility. This explains why more energy is required to raise the 
temperature of water than would be required if hydrogen bonds did 
not exist. In effect, hydrogen bonding permits water to store more 
energy than would otherwise be feasible for a given temperature 
increase. Water’s high heat capacity has crucial biological results 
since it makes the water more resistant to temperature changes.
3. High latent heat of vaporization
The latent heat of vaporization is a measure of the thermal energy 
required to vaporize a liquid, converting it from a liquid to a gas. 
In the case of water, it entails the transformation of liquid water 
into water vapour. Water has a comparatively high latent heat of 
vaporization. This is due to its high heat capacity. Because water 
molecules tend to stick together via hydrogen bonds, very significant 
quantities of energy are required for vaporization to occur because 
hydrogen bonds must be broken before molecules can escape as gas.
4. Density and freezing properties
Water is a unique molecule in that its solid form, ice, is less dense 
than its liquid form. Water density begins to fall below 4°C. As 
a result, ice floats on liquid water and insulates the water beneath 
it. This minimizes the likelihood of big amounts of water freezing 
entirely and increases the likelihood of life surviving under cold 
temperatures. Changes in water density as a result of temperature 
generate currents, which aid in the circulation of nutrients in the 
oceans.
5. High surface tension and cohesion
Water molecules have very high cohesion; in other words, they tend 
to stick to each other. These cohesive forces are connected to water’s 
adhesion property, or the attraction of water molecules to other 
molecules. This attraction can be stronger than water’s cohesive 
forces, especially when the water is exposed to charged surfaces like 
those found on the interior of thin glass tubes known as capillary 
tubes (Figure 3.3). Water “climbs” up the tube placed in a glass of 
water, causing the water to look higher on the sides of the tube than 
in the middle. This is due to the fact that water molecules are more 
attracted to the charged glass walls of the capillary than to each other 
and hence adhere to it. Capillary action is the name given to this 
sort of adhesion. As described in unit 2, figure 2.16, cohesive and 
adhesive forces are crucial for the transport of water from the roots 
to the leaves in plants.
Figure 3.3 Cohesion and 
adhesion (H2O) 
53
Grade 10 Biology Unit 3: Biochemical molecules                                               High cohesion also results in high surface tension at the surface of 
the water. This allows certain small organisms, such as raft spiders, 
to exploit the surface of the water as a habitat, allowing them to settle 
on or skate over its surface (Figure 3.4).
6. Boiling and Freezing Points
The ability of water molecules to form hydrogen bonds, as shown 
in figure 3.5, is responsible for many of water’s unique properties. 
Despite its low molecular weight, it has a very high boiling point 
(100°C). This is due to the fact that water requires more energy 
to break its hydrogen bonds before it can begin to boil. The same 
concept is used to calculate the freezing point. The boiling and 
freezing points of water is important for aquatic ecosystems. If water 
is easily frozen or boiled, drastic changes in the environment would 
affect bodies of water such as oceans or lakes, killing all organisms 
that live in water. This is also why sweat can keep our bodies cool. 
Consider how water differs from most other compounds in terms of 
its boiling and freezing points (Table 3.1).
Table 3.1 Boiling and freezing points of water
Compound Boiling Point Freezing Point
Ethanol 78.40C -114.6°C
Acetic acid 117.9°C 16.6°C
Hydrogen Sulfide -62°C -84°C
Water 100°C 0°C
3.1.2 Inorganic ions
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
•	mention	important	inorganic	ions	that	are	necessary	for	life,
•	mention	diets	that	contain	inorganic	ions,
•	discuss	the	effect	of	deficiency	of	nutrient	elements	in	our	body, 	
•	explain	the	importance	of	each	nutrient	element	to	the	human	
body.Objectives
Inorganic ions are charged entities because they are atoms with 
unshared electrons in their outer shell. They are either positively 
or negatively charged. They are virtually usually coupled with an 
oppositely charged ion. Inorganic ions are found in living bodies in 
two forms: free and dissolved in the cytoplasm and associated with 
complex organic substances. They participate in a variety of critical 
functions in living beings. Although they are only found in trace 
amounts in our bodies, their significance cannot be overstated. Any 
variations in their concentrations inside the human body can have 
catastrophic implications.
Figure 3.4 Surface tension 
allowing Raft spider to walk 
on the water surface 
Activity 3.3 Answer to the 
question
Explain the importance of 
properties of water in:
a. transpiration 
b. the movement of 
organisms on water surface 
c. during temperature 
fluctuations in water bodies
Activity 3.4 Group 
discussion
Form a group of 2-3 
students and discuss what 
inorganic ions are and their 
contribution to our body. 
Then present your findings 
to your classmates.What are inorganic ions?
54
Grade 10 Biology       Unit 3: Biochemical molecules                                               When discussing inorganic ions in the context of the human body, 
they are frequently referred to as minerals. In this section, you will 
go over some of the most important inorganic ions in the human 
body, including their occurrence, sources, and role in homeostasis 
maintenance. You will also investigate the clinical conditions caused 
by alterations in their usual concentrations as part of your tasks.
Classification of inorganic ions
Based on their requirement in the daily diet of a normal individual, 
inorganic ions or minerals in the human body are divided into two 
categories; Macro-nutrients & Micro-nutrients
Table 3.2 Macro and micro-nutrients in living systems
Macro-nutrients: required in the 
daily diet Micro-nutrients/trace el -
ements: required in small 
amounts 
Sodium,  Phosphorus, Magne -
sium, Potassium, Sulfur, Chlo -
rideIron, Copper,
Iodine,
Manganese, etc
a. Hydrogen ions
These are the most important ions to maintain balance and 
equilibrium in living systems. They are released in the cells during 
various metabolic processes. They are found in the cytoplasm of cells 
as well as in the intercellular fluid, blood, cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), 
and other body fluids. 
The concentration of hydrogen ions is expressed as pH. The pH scale 
ranges from 1 to 14. The pH value has an inverse relationship with 
the concentration of hydrogen ions; that is, the higher the pH, the 
lower and the concentration of hydrogen ions. 
b. Sodium ions
The sodium ion is the body’s second most important positively 
charged ion. The concentration of sodium ions in extracellular fluids 
is higher than in cell cytoplasm. It is a critical nutrient that must be 
consumed in order for the human body to function normally.
The average person’s salt need is between 3 and 6 grams per day. It is 
commonly consumed in the form of common salt found in our foods. 
The average daily sodium intake exceeds the body’s requirements. 
The urines of the body eliminate excess salt. To maintain normal 
blood pressure in patients with high blood pressure, lesser salt intakes 
are required.What is the difference 
between inorganic ions 
and minerals?
Why macronutrients 
are required more than 
micronutrients in our 
diet?
How much is the body 
requirement of sodium 
ions for a human being?
 What is the importance of the hydrogen ion?
55
Grade 10 Biology Unit 3: Biochemical molecules                                               It is an extracellular cation that is common in body fluids but is 
present in lower concentrations within cells. 
c. Potassium ions
These are also positively charged ions abundantly present in our 
bodies. Contrary to sodium ions, potassium ions are the major 
intracellular cations, being in higher concentration within the 
cytoplasm of the cells.
Potassium ions must be taken in daily diet. An average human being 
must intake 3 to 4 grams of potassium daily. It is abundantly present 
in fruits like bananas, oranges, vegetables like potatoes, and meat like 
that of chicken and liver. 
Potassium is one of the body’s electrolytes that carry an electric 
charge when dissolved in body fluids such as blood. Most of the 
body’s potassium is located inside the cells. Potassium is necessary 
for the normal functioning of cells, nerves, and muscles. The body 
can use the large reservoir of potassium stored within cells to help 
maintain a constant level of potassium in blood. Its concentration in 
plasma is much raised during hemolysis (destruction) of red blood 
cells. 
d. Calcium ion
Calcium is the most abundant inorganic ion present in our body 
having great importance. It is a positively charged ion mainly present 
in the cytoplasm of cells. Bones and teeth are the major organs having 
a lot of calcium.
The calcium requirements of a healthy human are around 800 mg/
day. Milk and milk products are the ideal sources of calcium in our 
diet. Besides, leafy vegetables, egg yolk, fish, and beans, etc. also 
contain a lot of calcium. 
Calcium makes around 1 to 1.5 kg of our body weight. Although 99% 
of calcium is present in bones and teeth, around 1% of calcium is in 
the cytoplasm of other cells and extracellular fluid performs several 
important functions in our body. Calcium concentration in the 
plasma is around 9-11 mg/dl. What is the other 
importance of Sodium 
ions?
What is the importance of 
Potassium ions?
What is the importance of 
Calcium ions?
How much is the body requirement of potassium and where do 
we get it from?
How much is the body requirement of calcium and where do we 
get it from?
56
Grade 10 Biology       Unit 3: Biochemical molecules                                               e. Phosphate ions
These are the negatively charged inorganic ions abundantly present 
in our bodies. The body of an average man contains around 1 Kg of 
phosphate ions. Most of the phosphate ions are presently combined 
with calcium in bones and teeth.
Its requirements are equivalent to calcium. An adult male needs to 
take 800 mg of phosphate ions daily in his diet. Milk, cereals, meat, 
and eggs are rich sources of phosphate ions. The plasma concentration 
of phosphate ions is around 3-4 mg/dl. It is more abundantly present 
in the cells. 
f. Chloride ions
These are the negatively charged inorganic ions present in 
extracellular fluids. Its concentration in the body is almost similar to 
that of sodium ions, the major extracellular cations.
Its average daily requirement is 5 to 10 grams. It is usually taken along 
with sodium in the form of NaCl present in cooked food.
Chloride ions perform their role in combination with sodium ions. 
They are involved in maintaining the osmotic pressure, fluid balance, 
and acid-base balance in our body, just like sodium. They are required 
to make Hydrochloric acid (HCl) present in gastric juice, which is 
necessary to digest proteins in the stomach. Hydrochloric acid (HCl) 
in return kills bacteria and other pathogens in food when it enters 
the stomach. Salivary amylase is an enzyme to digest starch that is 
activated by chloride ions. 
g. Iron ions
These are the positively charged ions present in or body. Around 70% 
of iron ions in our body are present in haemoglobin within the red 
blood cells. Source of iron: legumes such as beans, red meat, liver, 
spinach, pumpkin seeds, fish, etc.
As a component of haemoglobin and myoglobin, iron is needed for 
the transport of oxygen and carbon dioxide in our bodies. It is an 
essential component of cytochromes that are a component of the 
electron transport chain. Iron is a component of the peroxidase 
enzyme, a lysosomal enzyme necessary for bacteria and other 
phagocytosed particles in the white blood cells. How much is the body 
requirement and 
from where do we get 
Phosphate ions?
What is the importance 
of Chloride ions to 
human beings?
What is the importance of Iron ions to human beings?
What could be 
the consequence 
of abnormal Iron 
metabolism in our body?
What are the sources and body requirements of Chloride ions?
57
Grade 10 Biology Unit 3: Biochemical molecules                                               Three clinical conditions associated with the abnormal iron 
metabolism in our body are:
Iron-deficiency Anemia: a common condition in individuals with an 
iron-deficient diet,
Hemosiderosis: characterized by excess iron in the body, and
Hemochromatosis: a condition which abnormal iron deposits are 
formed in the liver, spleen, skin, and pancreas.
h. Copper ions
Copper ions are the positively charged inorganic ions that are present 
in our bodies. Source of copper ions include: shellfish, seeds and nuts, 
organ meats, wheat, whole-grain, chocolate, etc. It is an essential 
component of several important proteins and enzymes. They are 
needed for the synthesis of haemoglobin, collagen, and elastin. Also, 
it is required for the normal development of the nervous system. 
Wilson disease is a rare clinical condition caused by abnormal copper 
metabolism in our body. It is characterized by abnormal copper 
deposition in the liver and brain causing hepatic cirrhosis and brain 
damage. The copper deposition in kidneys can cause renal failure. 
i. Iodine ions 
Iodine is a type of mineral found naturally in the earth’s soil and 
ocean waters. Many salt water and plant-based foods contain iodine, 
and this mineral is most-widely available in iodized salt. Iodine plays 
a vital role in the thyroid health. Thyroid gland, which is located at 
the base of the front of the neck, helps regulate hormone production. 
These hormones control metabolism, heart health, etc.
To make thyroid hormones, thyroid gland takes up iodine in small 
amounts. Without iodine, thyroid hormone production can decrease. 
A “low” or underactive thyroid gland can lead to a condition 
called hypothyroidism. You can get enough iodine from your diet by 
eating dairy products, fortified foods, and salty water fish. Iodine is 
also available in plant foods that grow in naturally iodine-rich soil. 
You can also get the mineral by adding iodized salt in your food.
Goiter is an enlarged thyroid gland. Your thyroid may become 
enlarged as a result from either hypothyroidism or hyperthyroidism. What are Copper ions?
What happens during 
abnormal copper 
metabolism?
What are the sources and body requirements of Chloride ions?
58
Grade 10 Biology       Unit 3: Biochemical molecules                                               Hyperthyroidism is an overactive thyroid gland. Amount of iodine 
ions required for the normal function is 150kg/day. 
In order to summarize what you have studied in this section (3.1.2) 
fill-in the blank spaces given in activity 3.5 below.
3.1.3. Organic molecules
An organic molecule is a compound that contains carbon and is 
found in living things. Carbon forms the basis of organic life due to 
its ability to form large and complex molecules via covalent bonding. 
Four principal groups of organic compounds contribute to much of 
the structure and function of living things. These are carbohydrates, 
lipids, proteins, and nucleic acids. At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
•	discuss	the	role	of	biological	molecules	in	the	cell	structure,
•		Classify	 organic	 molecules	 based	 on	their	 constituent	 elements	 and	the	monomers	 from	 which	 they	
are	constructed.
•	elaborate	the	functions	of	carbohydrates, 	proteins, 	lipids, 	and	Nucleic	acids	to	the	body,
•	conduct	experiments	to	identify	nutrients	in	different	foodstuffs,
•	appreciate	why	Ethiopians	use	malting	seeds	to	make	local	drinks	(Tella, 	Areke), 	and	
•	appreciate	the	significance	of		local	drinks	prepared	from	malting	seeds	in	Ethiopia. Objectives
What are organic 
molecules? 
Activity 3.5 Fill in the blank spaces in the table
Fill in the blank spaces in the table with appropriate answers
Type of  Inor -
ganic IonsSource of  in -
organic ions Amount 
requiredImportance Type of  defi -
ciency diseaseExcess intake 
results in
Hydrogen ions 
Sodium ions
Potassium ions
Calcium ions 
Phosphate ions
Chlorine ions
Chloride ions
Iron ion
Copper ions
Iodine ions
59
Grade 10 Biology Unit 3: Biochemical molecules                                               After your work on activity 3.6 above your teacher will introduce you 
to the major organic molecules. The type of food items from which 
we get the major organic molecules, the elements that form each 
organic molecule, the monomers and the results of polymerization 
of the monomers will be slightly introduced. Finally, you will do 
laboratory activities (food tests) for each of the food item you study.  
Organic molecules including carbohydrates, lipids, proteins, 
and nucleic acids are made up of small, single molecular units 
(monomers). Monomers are connected by strong covalent bonds to 
create polymers. Polymers are long chains of molecules formed of 
many single units bonded one after the other. Table 3.3 lists the basic 
monomers that combine to produce organic molecules.
Table 3.3 Elements and monomers forming organic molecules
Organic molecules Elements forming 
the moleculeMonomer
Proteins C, H, O and N Amino acids
Lipids C, H, O Glycerol and fatty acid
Carbohydrates C, H, O Monosaccharides
Glucose
Galactose
Fructose
Nucleic acids C, H, O, N and P Nucleotides
Carbohydrates
Carbohydrates are macromolecules with which most consumers 
are somewhat familiar. To lose weight, some individuals adhere 
to “low-carbohydrate” diets. Athletes, in contrast, often use more 
carbohydrates before important competitions to ensure that they have 
sufficient energy to compete at a high level. Carbohydrates are, in 
fact, an essential part of our diet; grains, fruits, and vegetables are all-
natural sources of carbohydrates. Carbohydrates provide energy to Activity 3.6 Group work
After defining what the 
organic molecules are 
(above), in group of 3-4 
students, explore the 
different kinds of organic 
molecules, for instance, food 
items you know, and sort 
them into different types of 
organic molecules. Then let 
one of your members reflect 
on your classification. Let 
him/she explain the basis for 
classification of e.g. the type 
of elements that constitute 
the organic molecule.What monomers do make up organic molecules?
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
•	name	the	different	types	of	carbohydrates,
•	discuss	the	importance	of	monosaccharides, 	and	disaccharides,
•	explain	which	food	items	are	sources	of	carbohydrates, 	and
•	tell	the	types	and	importance	of	polysaccharidesObjectives
What are carbohydrates?
60
Grade 10 Biology       Unit 3: Biochemical molecules                                               the body, particularly through glucose, a simple sugar. Carbohydrates 
also have other important functions in humans, animals, and plants. 
Some carbohydrates rich food items are given in figure 3.5 below.
Figure 3.5 Food items rich in carbohydrate
Carbohydrates are made of three major elements; carbon, hydrogen, 
and oxygen. In carbohydrates, the ratio of hydrogen to oxygen is 2:1. 
There are three main groups of carbohydrates; monosaccharides, 
disaccharides, and polysaccharides.
a. Monosaccharides
Monosaccharides are molecules that contain only one sugar unit. 
Sugars dissolve quickly in water, forming sweet-tasting solutions. 
Monosaccharides have the general formula (CH2O)n (CnH2nOn) 
where ‘n’ refers to the number of carbon. In monosaccharides, the 
ratio of carbon to hydrogen to oxygen is 1:2:1. Monosaccharides 
are made up of a single sugar molecule (the term “mono” refers to 
one). When categorizing monosaccharides based on the number of 
carbon atoms in each molecule, the following are the most common: 
1) trioses (3C), 2) pentoses (5C), and 3) hexoses (6C). 
C6H12O6 is the chemical formula for hexose sugar. This is referred 
to as the molecular formula. It is also useful to show how the atoms 
are arranged, which can be done with a diagram known as the 
structural formula. The structural formula of the most common 
monosacchirdes; glucose, galactose and fructose are shown in Figure 
3.6. Despite having the identical chemical formula (C6H12O6), 
glucose, galactose, and fructose differ structurally and chemically 
(and are known as isomers) due to different atom positions in the 
carbon chain.
Which types of 
monosaccharide do 
you know? Mention 
and discuss the roles 
of commonly known 
monosaccharide for cells.
Glucose    Galactose     Fructose
Figure 3.6 Structural formula of 
glucose, Galactose and Fructose
61
Grade 10 Biology Unit 3: Biochemical molecules                                               Roles of monosaccharides in living organisms
Monosaccharides are the simplest forms of sugar and the most basic 
units (monomers) from which all carbohydrates are built. They also 
play very important roles in living organisms. Major functions of 
monosaccharide in include:
1.  as a source of energy in respiration: this is due to a large number 
of carbon-hydrogen bonds. These bonds can be broken to release 
a lot of energy, which is transferred to help make ATP (Adenosine 
triphosphate) from ADP (Adenosine diphosphate) and phosphate. 
The most important monosaccharide in energy metabolism is 
glucose. 
2.  as building blocks for larger molecules: for example, glucose is 
used to make the polysaccharides starch, glycogen, and cellulose. 
Ribose (a pentose sugar) is one of the molecules used to make RNA 
(ribonucleic acid) and ATP . Deoxyribose (also a pentose sugar) is 
one of the molecules used to make DNA.
b. Disaccharides (C12H22O11)
Disaccharides are formed of two monosaccharides. The three most 
common disaccharides are: 
1) Maltose, which is composed of glucose + glucose, 
2) Lactose, which is composed of glucose + galactose and 
3) Sucrose, which is composed of glucose + fructose 
Maltose or malt sugar is the product of breakdown of starch catalyzed 
by the enzyme amylase. Sucrose is the transport sugar in plants and 
the sugar that is commonly purchased in stores. Lactose is a sugar 
found in milk and is thus an important dietary component.
 
Figure 3.7 Disaccharides a) Maltose b) Lactose   c) Sucrose                         
c. Polysaccharides -(C6H10O5)-n
The most important polysaccharides are starch, glycogen, and 
cellulose. Polysaccharides are made of polymers of monomer glucose. 
Because glucose is the primary source of energy for cells, living 
organisms must store it in the proper form. If glucose accumulated in 
cells, it would dissolve and cause the cell’s contents to become overly Activity 3.7 Write the 
formulas
The formula for a hexose 
sugar is C6H12O6 or 
(CH2O)6. 
1. What is the formula of a:
a.  triose sugar?
b.  tetrose sugar?
c.  pentose sugar?
62
Grade 10 Biology       Unit 3: Biochemical molecules                                               concentrated, compromising the cell’s osmotic properties. Glucose 
is a reactive molecule that would disrupt normal cell chemistry. 
Condensation reactions convert glucose to a storage polysaccharide, 
which is a convenient, compact, inert (un-reactive), and insoluble 
molecule, avoiding these issues. The storage polysaccharide formed 
is starch in plants and glycogen in animals. Glucose can be made 
available again quickly by an enzyme-controlled reaction.
 
Perform the following activity about how Ethiopian traditional 
beverages are produced by malting seeds.Activity 3.8 Group work
Form a group of 2-3 students and using diagrams/models, explore 
the contribution of carbohydrates (monosaccharide, disaccharides 
and polysaccharides) as structural components of cells and their 
functions for cells and the human body as a whole. 
Laboratory Activity 3.9 Test for reducing sugars
Background
All monosaccharides, such as glucose, and some disaccharides, 
such as maltose, are considered reducing sugars. Sucrose is the only 
common non-reducing sugar. Reducing sugars get their name from 
the fact that they can carry out a reduction reaction. The Benedict’s 
test, which uses Benedict’s reagent, makes use of this. Benedict’s 
reagent is a blue-coloured copper (II) sulphate solution in an 
alkaline solution. Sugars are used to convert soluble blue copper 
sulphate, which contains copper(II) ions, to insoluble brick red 
copper oxide, which contains copper (I). A brick-red precipitate of 
copper oxide can be seen.
Reducing	sugar	+	Cu2+								oxidized	sugar	+	Cu+	blue	red-brown	
Procedure  
Add a 10 % glucose solution in a test tube
Add Benedict’s reagent to the solution
Heat in a water bath. 
Observe the colour change
Answer the following questions
1. How does the colour of your solution change as you continue 
heating?
2. Why do we heat in a water bath?
3. What is the reason for the colour change?
63
Grade 10 Biology Unit 3: Biochemical molecules                                                
Starch [-(C6H10O5)-n]
Starch is the plant’s stored form of sugar. Plants can produce glucose, 
and the surplus glucose is stored as starch in various plant components 
such as roots and seeds. Animals ingest starch, which is broken down 
into smaller molecules such as glucose. The glucose can subsequently 
be absorbed by the cells.
Glycogen [-(C6H10O5)-n]
Glycogen, which is made up of monomers of glucose, is the storage 
form of glucose in humans and other animals. Glycogen, the animal 
analogue of starch, is a highly branched polymer that is often stored 
in liver and muscle cells. Glycogen is broken down to release glucose 
if glucose levels fall.
Cellulose [-(C6H10O5)-n]
Cellulose is a naturally occurring biopolymer that is abundant. Plant 
cell walls are mostly made of cellulose, which provides structural 
support to the cell. Wood and paper are examples of cellulosic 
materials. Cellulose is made up of glucose monomers that are linked 
together in the glucose molecule by carbon atom bonds.
Every other glucose monomer in cellulose is densely packed as long 
extended chains. This is what gives cellulose its rigidity and high 
strength, which are critical for plant cells. Dietary fiber is cellulose 
that passes through our digestive system. While animal digestive 
enzymes cannot break down the glucose-glucose linkages in cellulose, 
herbivores such as cows, buffalos, and horses can digest cellulose-
rich grass and use it as a food source. Certain bacteria live in these 
animals’ rumens (part of herbivores’ digestive systems) and secrete Laboratory Activity 3.10: Study of traditional beverages of Ethiopia
In Ethiopia traditional beverages are so delicious with mild alcoholic contents. There are typical 
procedures to prepare each of these traditional beverages. Being in groups of 3-4, study methods of 
preparation of one of the traditional beverages: Borde, Shameta, Tej or Tela
Methods of study:
Interview local producers
Observation
Using internet, books, or articles
a) What is the purpose of malting? 
b) Do they use Gesho? If so why?
c) Discuss the content of the traditional beverage 
    and the process of their preparation. 
64
Grade 10 Biology       Unit 3: Biochemical molecules                                               the enzyme cellulase. Cellulases may degrade cellulose into glucose 
monomers, which the animal can utilize as an energy source.
A cell wall often comprises numerous layers of fibers that run in 
different directions to boost strength. Other molecules aid in the 
cross-linking of the cellulose fibers, and some form a glue-like matrix 
around the fibers, which improves strength even further. The strength 
of cellulose fibers is roughly similar to that of steel. This implies that 
when pulled at both ends, they are extremely difficult to stretch or 
break, allowing a cell to endure the tremendous pressures that build 
within it due to osmosis.
Without a wall, the cell would explode in a dilute fluid. These 
pressures help the plant grow by hardening tissues and stimulating 
cell expansion. The shape of the cell as it grows is determined by 
the arrangement of fibers around it. Despite their strength, cellulose 
fibers are porous, allowing water and solutes to pass between the cell 
surface membrane and the surrounding environment.
Laboratory activity 3.11: Test for polysaccharides-starch and glycogen
This test is specific for polysaccharides. It is used to differentiate polysaccharides from the rest of 
carbohydrates. This test can be used to differentiate between glycogen, and starch. 
Procedure
1.  Take 2 ml of the given solution (starch, dextrin, or glycogen) in a test tube
2. Add 2-3 drops of iodine reagent in the above test tube
3. Wait for some time
4. Observe for the colour change
When the iodine reagent is added to the solution, the colour of the solution may change to Blue, 
Reddish-purple. 
Answer the following questions
i.  What colour change is observed in the food item that contains starch? 
ii.  What colour change is observed in the food item that contains dextrin?
iii.  What colour change is observed in the food item that contains glycogen?
Major functions of carbohydrates
1. They serve as the primary source of energy for most organisms. 
Glucose in fruit juice, lactose in milk, starch in wheat, potato, rice 
etc is different forms of carbohydrate that we harvest energy from.
2. They act as a storage form of energy in the body (e.g. Starch and 
Glycogen). 
• Starch stores energy for plants. In animals, it is catalyzed by the 
enzyme amylase (found in saliva) to fulfil the energy requirement.
• Glycogen is a polysaccharide food reserve of animals, bacteria, 
and fungi. What do you think about 
the structure of plant cell 
wall? Which biochemical 
molecules form a cell wall?
65
Grade 10 Biology Unit 3: Biochemical molecules                                               • In mammals, glycogen is stored in the liver and muscle as 
granules or particles (Up to 10% of liver mass and 1-2% muscle 
mass). Muscle glycogen supplies energy for muscle contraction 
during exercise.  
3. They serve as cell membrane components that mediate some forms 
of intercellular communication.  
4. They form the structural component of many organisms, including 
the cell walls of bacteria, fungi, and the exoskeleton of many insects. 
Chitin is involved in the formation of a fungal cell wall, whereas 
cellulose is an important component of ruminant diets.
Lipids
 At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
•	discuss	what		lipids	are,
•	tell	the	importance	of	lipids	for	our	cells,
•	describe	the	structure	of	glycerol	and	fatty	acids, 	and
•	explain	the	importance	of	phospholipids	in	the	cell	
membrane. Objectives
Lipids are diverse groups of biomolecules that are insoluble in water 
but soluble in nonpolar solvents such as ether, chloroform, and 
acetone. Lipids are made of elements carbon, hydrogen and oxygen. 
It includes fats and oils and cholestrols. Fats are solid at room 
temperature and oils are liquid at room temperature. Chemically, 
they are very similar. We could say those true lipids are organic 
compounds formed by fatty acids combining with alcohol. The 
butter, cooking oil, and the meat we eat are good examples of lipids. 
Lipids are polymers of fatty acids and glycerol molecules.
Fatty acids [CH3(CH2)nCOOH]
Fatty acids are a series of acids, some of which are found in fats 
(lipids). CH3(CH2)nCOOH is the general formula for fatty acids. 
The contain the acidic group –COOH, known as a carboxyl group. 
The larger molecules in the series have long hydrocarbon tails 
attached to the acid ‘head’ of the molecule. As the name suggests, the 
hydrocarbon tails consist of a chain of carbon atoms combined with 
hydrogen. The chain is often 15 or 17 carbon atoms long.
Based on the presence or absence of double bonds (–C=C–) in their 
structure, there are two types of fatty acids: 
Unsaturated fatty acids consist of one or more double bonds in their 
structure so that they do not contain the maximum possible amount 
of hydrogen. Double bonds make fatty acids and lipids melt more 
easily – for example, most oils are unsaturated. If there is more than What are lipids?
Activity 3.12 Group work
After your study on saturated 
and unsaturated fatty acids, 
do the following activity.
Why are unsaturated 
fatty acids healthier than 
saturated fatty acids? Make 
a group of 5 students and 
collect full information 
about it from health officers 
in your area and present 
the report to the whole 
classmates.
66
Grade 10 Biology       Unit 3: Biochemical molecules                                               one double bond in their structure, the fatty acids or lipids can be 
described as polyunsaturated; if there is only one double bond, they 
are called monounsaturated. Plant lipids are often unsaturated and 
occur as oils, e.g. olive oil and sunflower oil.
Saturated fatty acids have no double bonds in their carbon-carbon 
chain. All saturated fatty acids are solid at room temperature. Animal 
lipids are often saturated and occur as animal fat. 
Fat is stored in several places in the human body, particularly just 
below the dermis of the skin and around the kidneys. Below the skin, 
it also acts as an insulator against loss of heat. 
Phospholipids
Phospholipids are a subset of lipids. Each molecule has the unusual 
property of having one water-soluble end. This is because one of the 
three fatty acid molecules is replaced by a phosphate group, which is 
polar and thus dissolves in water.
The phosphate group is hydrophilic (water-loving) and makes the 
head of a phospholipid molecule hydrophilic, although the two 
remaining tails are still hydrophobic (water-hating). This allows the 
molecules to form a membrane around a cell, where the hydrophilic 
heads lie in the watery solutions on the outside of the membrane, and 
the hydrophobic tails form a layer that is impermeable to hydrophilic 
substances. 
Major of functions of lipids
1. Fatty acids serve as the foundation for other types of lipids and 
serve as stored energy.
2. Serve as major fuel store and major dietary lipid in plants (oil) and 
animals (Fat). Fats are stored in specialized cells called adipose cells 
(fat cells), serve as poor conductors of heat and provide insulation 
at low temperatures.
3. They serve as structural components in cell membranes (e.g., 
phospholipids); precursors for the synthesis of Vitamin D, Bile 
acids, hormones of adrenal cortex such as cortisol, and aldosterone; 
female sex hormones such as progesterone and estrogen and male 
sex hormones such as testosterone (Cholesterol). 
4. Some serve as protective coatings on skin, fur and feathers of 
animals, birds and fruit and leaves of plants (Example, Wax). The 
shiny appearance of fruits and leaves is due to waxes. Waxes also 
serve as a water barrier for animals, birds and insects; and also 
protects against cold. Where in our body do we 
encounter fats?
Figure 3.9 Phospholipid 
bilayer Figure 3.8 A phospholipid 
molecule
67
Grade 10 Biology Unit 3: Biochemical molecules                                               Proteins
 At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
•	mention	the	importance	of	proteins	to	cells	and	the	body	of	
living	things,
•	elaborate	formation	of	proteins	by	amino	acids,
•	differentiate	proteins	according	to	their	structure,
•	difine	what	are	amino	acides, 	and
•	group	proteins	according	to	their	function. Objectives 
Proteins are biological molecules composed of carbon, hydrogen, 
oxygen, and nitrogen and sometimes contain phosphorus and 
sulphur. Although amino acids may have other formulas, those in 
protein invariably have the general formula RCH(NH2)COOH, 
where C is carbon, H is hydrogen, N is nitrogen, O is oxygen, and R 
is a group, varying in composition and structure, called a side chain. 
Proteins are biological molecules made up of amino acids monomers. 
They are one of the most abundant organic molecules in living 
systems and have the widest range of functions of any macromolecule. 
Proteins can be structural, regulatory, contractile, or protective. They 
could be toxins or enzymes, or they could be used in transportation, 
storage, or membranes. Each cell in a living system may contain 
thousands of proteins, each with a distinct function. Their structures, 
like their functions, vary greatly. They are all, however, amino 
acid polymers arranged in a linear sequence (also referred to as a 
“peptide”). They are an extremely important class of macromolecule 
in living organisms. More than 50% of the dry mass of most cells 
is protein. Protein rich food items include; meat, cheese, milk, fish, 
beans, vegetables, etc.
Amino acids
Amino acids are the monomers that make up proteins. Amino acids 
have:
• a central carbon atom which is bonded to an amine group, –NH2, 
• a carboxylic acid group, –COOH and 
• a hydrogen atom                  What are proteins?
Activity 3.16 THINK-PAIR-
SHARE
In a group, discuss what 
you know about the 
structure and function of 
proteins. Before starting 
the discussion, write 
individually what you know 
about proteins. Finally, share 
what you know to your 
group members, discuss to 
consolidate and present your 
findings to the whole class. 
What are amino acids?
68
Grade 10 Biology       Unit 3: Biochemical molecules                                               The only way in which amino acids differ from each other is in the 
remaining, fourth, group of atoms bonded to the central carbon. 
This is called the R group (Figure 3.10). 20 different amino acids 
occur in the proteins of living organisms, all with a different R group. 
Examples of some amino acids (Alanine, valine, lysine, and asparatic 
acid) are given in figure 3.11 below. In the process of protein synthesis 
amino acids join by covalent linkage forming a peptide bond that 
elongates further and form a polypeptide bond. 
                     Figure 3.10 General formula of amino acids
          
Figure 3.11 Examples of amino acids
The peptide bond
Each amino acid is attached to another amino acid by a covalent 
bond. One loses a hydroxyl (–OH) group from its carboxylic acid 
group, while the other loses a hydrogen atom from its amine group. 
This leaves a carbon atom of the first amino acid-free to bond with 
the nitrogen atom of the second. The link is called a peptide bond. 
The oxygen and two hydrogen atoms removed from the amino acids 
form a water molecule. 
 
Do you have any idea 
about the structure of 
proteins? 
Figure 3.12 Amino acids link together by the loss of a molecule of water to form a peptide bond.
69
Grade 10 Biology Unit 3: Biochemical molecules                                               The new molecule which has been formed is made up of two linked 
amino acids, and is called a dipeptide. Any number of extra amino 
acids could be added to the chain in a series of condensation reactions. 
A molecule made up of many amino acids linked together by peptide 
bonds is called a polypeptide. A complete protein molecule may 
contain just one polypeptide chain, or it may have two or more chains 
that interact with each other. 
In living cells, ribosomes are the sites where amino acids are joined 
together to form polypeptides. The reaction is controlled by enzymes. 
Polypeptides can be broken down into amino acids by breaking the 
peptide bonds. This is a hydrolysis reaction, involving the addition 
of water, and happens naturally in the stomach and small intestine 
during digestion. Here, protein molecules in food are hydrolyzed 
into amino acids before being absorbed into the blood.
According to their shape, proteins can also be classified into:
Globular proteins  area protein whose molecules curl up into a ‘ball’ 
shape, such as myoglobin or haemoglobin. In a living organism, 
proteins may be found in cells and other aqueous environments such 
as blood, tissue fluid, and in the phloem of plants. Globular proteins 
usually curl up so that their non-polar, hydrophobic R groups point 
into the center of the molecule, away from their watery surroundings. 
Water molecules are excluded from the center of the folded protein 
molecule. Many globular proteins have roles in metabolic reactions. 
Their precise shape is the key to their functioning. Enzymes, 
haemoglobin, antibodies are examples of globular proteins. 
Fibrous proteins are protein molecules that do not coil up into a 
ball but form long strands. Fibrous proteins are not usually soluble 
in water and most have structural roles. For example, keratin forms 
hair, nails, and the outer layers of the skin making these structures 
waterproof. Another example of a fibrous protein is collagen which is 
found in skin, tendons, cartilage, bones, teeth, and the walls of blood 
vessels.
Major functions of proteins
1. Structural proteins: are fibrous and tough, as well as insoluble in 
water. They are structural elements of connective tissues, bones, 
tendons, cartilages, nails, hair, and horns. Collagen, elastin, and 
keratin are examples of structural proteins.
2. Enzymes: are globular proteins that serve as biological catalysts. 
They catalyze metabolic reactions by lowering the activation 
energy, which increases the reaction rate. Protein enzymes include 
DNA polymerase, lysozyme, nitrogenase, and lipase.Activity 3.17 Group work
Form a group of 2-3 students 
and using diagrams/models, 
explore the contribution 
of proteins (globular and 
fibrous/functional and 
structural) as structural 
components of cells, and 
their functions for cells and 
the human body as a whole.
70
Grade 10 Biology       Unit 3: Biochemical molecules                                               3. Hormones: are polypeptides that are made up of long chains of 
linked amino acids. They play critical roles in the regulation of 
the body›s physiological processes, which include reproduction, 
growth and development, electrolyte balance, sleep, and so on. 
Growth hormone (GH) and follicle-stimulating hormone are two 
examples of these hormones (FSH).
4. Respiratory pigments: are globular protein pigments that are 
typically water-soluble. Myoglobin, which provides oxygen to 
working muscles; and haemoglobin, which transports blood to all 
tissues and organs via the blood, is the two examples.
5. Transport proteins: are cell membrane structural components. 
They create channels in the plasma membrane to transport specific 
molecules within the cells. Some of them are also found in animal 
blood and lymph. Serum albumin (which transports hemin and 
fatty acids), channel proteins, and carrier proteins are examples of 
transport proteins.
6. Motor proteins: are involved in muscle contraction and relaxation 
(muscle movement). Actin, myosin, kinesin, and dynein are all 
components.
7. Storage proteins: In cells, these proteins serve as a storage reserve 
for amino acids and metal ions. They can be found in eggs, seeds, 
and pulses. Ferritin, ovalbumin, and casein are examples of storage 
proteins.
8. Toxins: Bacteria are the most common producers of these 
proteins. Diphtheria toxin, Pseudomonas exotoxin, and ribosome-
inactivating proteins are among them. By causing cytotoxicity, 
they aid bacteria in attacking and killing their host organism.
Laboratory Activity 3.18: The Biuret test for proteins
Background
In this test, a protein in an alkaline solution reacts 
with copper ions to produce a mauve/purple colour.
There are two ways of carrying out the test:
Method 1
Procedure
Mix the food or 2 cm3 of the test solution with 
Sodium hydroxide solution in a test tube
Add a few drops of 1% copper (II) sulphate solution.
Allow the mixture to stand for a few minutes (to 
allow the colour to develop fully).Method 2
Procedure
1.  Mix the food or 2 cm3 of the test solution 
with Biuret solution (which contains copper 
ions in an alkaline solution).
2. Allow the mixture to stand for a few
Answer the following questions
1.  Which food items can be tested for proteins?
2. What is the reason for the colour change?
3.  Why do you add a copper (II) sulphate 
solution?
71
Grade 10 Biology Unit 3: Biochemical molecules                                               Nucleic acids
 At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
•	describe	the	structures	of	nucleotides	and	nucleic	acids,
•	differentiate	between	DNA	and	RNA, 	and
•	explain	the	importance	of	DNA	and	RNA. Objectives 
Nucleic acids are chemical molecules made up of phosphoric acid, 
sugars, and organic bases that exist naturally. Nucleic acids are the 
cell’s principal information-carrying molecules, and they determine 
every living thing’s inherited features by directing the process of 
protein synthesis. Deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) and ribonucleic 
acid (RNA) are the two main types of nucleic acids (RNA).
The structure of DNA and RNA
DNA stands for deoxyribonucleic acid and RNA for ribonucleic 
acid. Nucleic acids such as DNA and RNA, like proteins and 
polysaccharides, are macromolecules. They are also polymers, made 
up of many similar, smaller molecules joined into a long chain. The 
smaller molecules that form DNA and RNA are called nucleotides. 
DNA and RNA are therefore polynucleotides. They are often referred 
as nucleic acids.
Most organisms carry their genetic information in the nucleotide 
sequences of DNA, but a few viruses carry it in RNA. Along the 
length of the DNA is a series of chemical structures called genes. 
Genes are stretches of DNA that code for RNA and amino acids and, 
therefore, proteins. Laboratory Activity 3.19: Xanthoproteic Test
Background: Proteins are polymers of amino acids. They are complex organic compounds containing 
nitrogen, hydrogen, carbon and oxygen. Proteins are abundant in our everyday food e.g. egg, soya 
bean, pulses, fish, milk etc. The presence of proteins can be confirmed qualitatively by using several 
tests, Xanthoproteic test is one of them. Xanthoproteic test is a biochemical method, which is used for 
the identification of amino acids containing phenolic or indolic groups like phenylalanine, tyrosine, 
and tryptophan (aromatic amino acids). 
Procedures 
1.  Take a clean test tube and add 1 ml of the sample 
solution within it.
2. After that add 1 ml of concentrated nitric acid to it.
3.  Keep the test tube at room temperature and allow it 
to cool down.
4.  After that add 1 ml of 40% NaOH solution to the test 
tube.Answer the following questions
1.  What colour change do you observe after 
adding nitric acid and cooling at room 
temperature?
2. Why do we add sodium hydroxide?
3.  What is the colour observed at the end of the 
experiment?
What are nucleic acids?
If you were asked to 
design a molecule that 
could act as a genetic 
material in living things, 
where would you start? 
72
Grade 10 Biology       Unit 3: Biochemical molecules                                               Nucleotides
Figure 3.8 shows the structure of nucleotides. Nucleotides are made 
up of three smaller components. These are:
• a nitrogen-containing base 
• a pentose sugar
• a phosphate group
There are five different nitrogen containing bases in DNA and RNA. 
The four nitrogenous bases in the DNA molecule are adenine, 
thymine, guanine, and cytosine. An RNA molecule also contains 
four bases, but have Uracil instead of thymine. These bases are 
often denoted by their first letters: A, T, C, G, and U. The order and 
composition of the different nucleotides sequences determines the 
hereditary function of the nucleic acids.  
Figure 3.13 The components of nucleotides.
The pentose (5-carbon) sugar can be either ribose (C5H10O5) (in 
RNA) or deoxyribose (C5H10O4) (in DNA) Figure 3.9. As their 
names suggest, deoxyribose is almost the same as ribose, except that 
it has no oxygen atom on its second carbon atom. 
Figure 3.14 Structures of deoxyribose and ribose sugars 
73
Grade 10 Biology Unit 3: Biochemical molecules                                               DNA is a large molecule made up of two strands (made of two chains) 
of nucleotides wounded into a double helix. RNA is much smaller 
and is single-stranded (made of a single chain). There are three types 
of RNA: mRNA (messenger RNA), rRNA(ribosomal RNA), and 
tRNA(transfer RNA).
 
Features DNA RNA
Nitrogenous 
bases Adenine, Guanine, Cytosine, Thy -
mine Adenine, Guanine, Cytosine, Uracil
Pentose sugar Deoxyribose sugar Ribose sugar
Phosphate Phosphate group Phosphate group
Size Huge-allows the molecule to carry 
the code for many different proteins 
in the genesMuch smaller-need code for only one 
protein; small size allows RNA to move 
out of the nucleus
Stability Very stable – ensures that the genes 
remain the same over the generationLess stable- is degraded quite quickly so 
does not carry on coding for a protein
Number of 
strandsTwo strands- allow coding of genes 
and replication during cell division.Single-stranded- does not replicateTable 3.4   Similarities and differences in function and structure of the nucleic acidsFigure 3.15 The structure of nucleic acids
74
Grade 10 Biology       Unit 3: Biochemical molecules                                               Major functions of Nucleic Acids: DNA and RNA
Deoxyribonucleic acids (DNA)
It is the genetic material that stores all the information required to be 
transferred to the next generation. The genetic information is stored 
in its nucleotide sequences. DNA has a unique property of replication 
or production of its copy that can be transferred to a daughter cell 
during cell reproduction. 
It specifies the biological development of all living organisms and 
viruses. It carries the genetic code (instructions for protein synthesis). 
Information coded in the nucleotide sequence of DNA for a particular 
protein is first copied to mRNA (by the process of transcription). The 
code in the mRNA is then translated into amino acid sequences of 
protein. Proteins are required to build an organism and catalyze all 
of its biochemical reactions thereby controlling all of the functions of 
the cell or organism. 
Ribonucleic acids (RNA)
RNA has different roles to play in different organisms. 
It acts as genetic material in some viruses and has enzymatic activity 
in other organisms 
(where it is called ribozyme). 
Three types of RNA are present among organisms: mRNA,  tRNA 
and rRNA. All three have essential roles in the development and 
maintenance of life. 
mRNA moves the genetic code (information for protein synthesis) 
from DNA to ribosomes (protein-synthesizing machinery in the cell).
tRNA helps the proteins synthesis by providing a source of amino 
acids (the building blocks of proteins).
rRNA form a complex with proteins making the structure the 
ribosome.
Activity 3.21 Group work
In a group of 3-4 students and using diagrams/models, explore the 
contribution of Nucleic acids (DNA and RNA) as components of 
cells and their functions (inheritance) for cells and the human body 
as a whole.
75
Grade 10 Biology Unit 3: Biochemical molecules                                               • Water is made of hydrogen and oxygen atoms and is important for plants and animals, where 
it forms a large part of the mass of each cell. 
• Extensive hydrogen bonding gives water unusual properties. 
• Water is liquid at most temperatures on the Earth’s surface. It has a high specific heat capacity, 
which makes liquid water relatively resistant to changes in temperature. 
• Water acts as a solvent for ions and polar molecules, and causes non-polar molecules to group 
together.
• Water has a relatively high latent heat of vaporization, meaning that evaporation has a strong 
cooling effect. It also has high cohesion and surface tension which affects the way it moves 
through narrow tubes such as xylem and allows it to form a surface on which some organisms 
can live. 
• Cells of any living organism are composed of organic and inorganic molecules, and each of 
these molecules is composed of atoms 
• In living organisms, inorganic molecules such as water and salts frequently lack carbon atoms 
• Organic molecules such as carbohydrates, lipids, proteins, and nucleic acids are large molecules 
containing carbon and hydrogen and are referred to as biological macromolecules. 
• Polymers are the most common type of biological macromolecule. Polymers are formed by 
combining smaller molecules known as monomers through a process known as polymerization. 
• carbohydrates are biological macromolecules made of carbon, hydrogen and oxygen atoms 
and that are composed of smaller molecules known as monomers. 
• Glucose is one of the monomers. 
• Monomers are regarded as the simplest and quickest source of energy. 
• carbohydrates are used to store energy in the bodies of living organisms until it is needed; as 
starch in plants and glycogen in human and animal liver and muscles.
• carbohydrates are a basic component of some cell parts, such as plant cell wall. They are also 
be found in cell membranes and protoplasm.
• lipids are biochemical macromolecules composed of carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen atoms. 
• lipids are made up of a diverse range of compounds such as fats, oils, waxes, phospholipids, 
and derived lipids such as steroids. 
• lipids are compounds are insoluble in water but soluble in nonpolar solvents such as benzene 
and carbon tetrachloride. 
• energy obtained from lipids is greater than the energy obtained from the same amount of 
carbohydrates.
• lipids account for approximately 5% of the organic materials found in the composition of a 
living cell. Lipids are also important in the structure of cell membranes. Unit Review
76
Grade 10 Biology       Unit 3: Biochemical molecules                                               • lipids act as a thermal insulator in animals and humans, allowing organisms to keep their body 
temperatures stable in cold and harsh environments.  
• lipids serve as a protective coating for the surfaces of many plants and animals, and some of 
them can act like hormones.
• proteins are the structural building blocks of all living organisms. They are made up of carbon, 
hydrogen, oxygen and nitrogen atoms. There are also proteins that contain sulfur. 
• proteins make up the majority of all living organisms, from the largest animals to the smallest 
microscopic organisms. 
• proteins play a role in the biochemical processes that keep life alive.
• proteins play an important role in the structure and function of living cells. 
• proteins from muscles, ligaments, tendons, organs, glands, nails, hair, and many of the body’s 
vital fluids, such as blood and lymph, are required for bone growth. 
• proteins also include enzymes and hormones, which stimulate and regulate all vital processes 
in the body.
• nucleic acids are biological macromolecules that contain the elements oxygen, hydrogen, 
carbon, nitrogen, and phosphorus. 
• nucleic acids are classified into two types: ribonucleic acid (RNA) and deoxyribonucleic acid 
(DNA) (DNA). 
• nucleic acids are composed of basic units known as nucleotides that bind together via covalent 
bonds to form a polynucleotide or nucleic acid. 
• nucleic acids are in charge of passing on genetic traits from one generation to the next during 
cell division. 
• DNA carries the genetic information responsible for a living organism’s distinct characteristics 
and organizes all of the cell’s vital activities.
• RNA is transcribed from the DNA. It then translated into the proteins responsible for genetic 
traits, and those responsible for organizing the vital activities.
77
Grade 10 Biology Unit 3: Biochemical molecules                                                I. True false Items: Say “True” or “False” for the following statements on your exercise book. 
1.  A deficiency disease caused by lack of iron in our food is called goiter.
2.  DNA is termed as a genetic material.
3.  All proteins are made up of fatty acids and glycerol molecules.
4.  Phospholids are molecules that are used for a dipeptide bond. Formation.
5.  Maltose is a disaccharide made of two glucose units.
6.  DNA is made of 5- Carbone sugar ribose, phosphate and a nitrogenous base
7.  Calcium is one of the inorganic ions that are used for bone and teeth formation.
8.  Water is a universal solvent.
9.  Proteins are made up of beta glucose molecules.
10.  Glycogen is a storage form of polysaccharide in animals.
  II. Multiple-choice Items
    Choose the correct answer from A – D and write your answer on your exercise book.
1. Disaccharides consist of:-
    A.  Two molecules of monosaccharides C. Four molecules of monosaccharides
    B. Three molecules of monosaccharides D. Five molecules of monosaccharides
2.  The basic unit of a protein molecule is ..........................
     A. Peptides    B. Amino acid   C. Allanylglycine   D. Albumins 
3. Which of the following is not a macromolecule? 
    A. RNA   B. DNA  C. Salt   D. Protein
4. The bonds that form between the atoms of polymeric macromolecules are ................... bonds. 
    A. hydrogen  B. peptide  C. disulfide  D. covalent 
5. Which of the following does not represent a correct monomer/polymer pairing? 
   A. Monosaccharide/polysaccharide  C. Triglyceride/cellulose
   B. Amino acid/protein   D. Nucleotide/nucleic acid 
6. Polymerization reactions in which polysaccharides are synthesized from monosaccharides
   A. require the formation of phosphodiester bonds between the amino acids. 
   B. are hydrolysis reactions.    
   C.  depends upon van der Waals forces to hold the amino acids together. 
   D. result in the formation of waterReview Questions 
78
Grade 10 Biology       Unit 3: Biochemical molecules                                               7. During the formation of a peptide linkage, a (n) ........................... is formed. 
     A. molecule of water                C. hydrophobic bond  
     B. disulfide bridge   D. hydrophilic bond 
8. Which of the following is responsible for making every amino acid unique? 
   A. Amino group     C. Carboxyl group    
   B. Hydrogen    D. “R” group 
9. Enzymes are:  
   A. DNA  B. Lipids   C. carbohydrates  D. proteins 
10. A protein  molecule is made of .......................................
   A. amino acids      C. Glucose monomers
   B. Glycerol and fatty acids monomers  D. only fatty acids
11. The monomers that make up polymeric carbohydrates like starch are called 
    A. nucleotides   B. trisaccharides  C. monosaccharides   D. nucleosides
12. A simple sugar with the formula C5H10O5 can be classified as a 
   A. hexose   B. polysaccharide  C. disaccharide  D. pentose 
13. DNA and RNA both include 
   A. pentoses  B. hexoses    C. fructoses   D. maltoses
14.  Lactose, or milk sugar, which is composed of one glucose unit and one galactose unit, can be 
classified as a 
   A. disaccharide  B. hexose   C. pentose   D. polysaccharide
15. Which of the following is not a function of calcium?
    A. formation of Bone and teeth   C. development of muscle cells
    B. formation of ligaments    D. all of them are not functions
16. Which property of water allows the insect called Raft Spider to walk on the surface of water?
     A. surface tension                C. Liquidity
     B. High specific heat     D. changing state
79
Grade 10 Biology Unit 3: Biochemical molecules                                                  III. Fill-in the blank Items 
Copy and complete the following table.  Place a cross mark (X) in each box as appropriate.
Globular protein 
e.g. Haemoglo -
bin
Fibrous protein 
e.g. Collagen
Monosaccharide
Disaccharide
glycogen
Starch
Cellulose
Lipid
Monomer
Polymer
Macromolecule
Polysaccharide
Contain subunits that form branched chain
Contains amino acids
Made from organic acids and glycerol
Contain glycosidic bonds
Contain peptide bond
One of its main functions is to act as an energy 
store
Usually insoluble in water
Usually has a structural function
Contain the elements Carbon, Hydrogen and 
Oxygen only
   Short Answer Items
1. Why are biological macromolecules considered as organic?
2. Describe the similarities and differences between glycogen and starch.
3. Explain at least three functions that lipids serve in plants and/or animals.
4. Mention food items that contain calcium.
5. What is the importance of high latent heat of vaporization of water?
6. How are cohesion and adhesion different?
7. Plants must get water from their roots to their branches. Explain how cohesion and adhesion 
might help plant get water from the ground to its upper leaves?
8. Why do phospholipids form lipid bilayers in aqueous conditions?
9. Unlike glycogen storage in human body, fat storage   is unlimited. Why?
80
Grade 10 Biology                   
     Content Learning objectives
4.1 What is a cell cycle 
4.2 Cell division 
4.2.1 Mitosis 
4.2.2 Meiosis
4.3  Renowned Geneticist in 
Ethiopia  4.1 Outline the series of events taking place in the cell cycle 
4.2 Identify the two types of cell division  
4.3 Compare and contrast Mitosis and Meiosis 
4.4 Explain the importance of cell division
4.5  Recognize the occurrence of cancer cells due to failure to con -
trol the cell cycle  
4.6 Appreciate the works of renowned Ethiopian Geneticist 
4.1 What is a cell cycle?
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
•	define	cell	cycle, 	
•	outline		the	different	stages	of	cell	cycle		and	
•	collect		information	on	cancer	Objectives
Before dealing with cell cycle, it is important to refresh your memory 
about cell structure and function, particularly the nucleus where key 
processes of cell reproduction takes place. The next  activity  (Activity 
4.1) gives you opportunity to construct at least two dimensional (2D)  
cell model  to show  an animal cell and arrangement of cell organelles  
using  a cardboard or stiff paper. You can follow the same procedure 
to prepare a model of plant cell, where chloroplasts and cell wall are 
included as additional structures.   The presence of cell wall in your 
model creates difference in the cytoplasmic division of plant cells and 
animal cells, which you will learn in the next lesson of cell division.
      Unit 4: Cell Cycle                                                Why not a cell 
diminishes in size 
through repeated cell 
division? What should 
happen before and after 
cell division to maintain 
cell size?
      What are the main divisions of a  cell  cycle ?
81
Grade 10 Biology Unit 4: Cell Cycle                                               A cell cycle is a sequence of events that takes place in the parent cell 
as a means of distributing genetic materials thereby forming daughter 
cells (Figure 4.1).  There are two main divisions of the cell cycle: 
Interphase and cell division.
Interphase is divided into three phases called G1, S, and G2. 
G1 Phase (First Gap): is the first stage of interphase.  During this 
stage, cells are quite active metabolically. They accumulate the 
building blocks of chromosomal DNA and the associated proteins 
as well as store sufficient energy reserves to complete the task of 
replicating each chromosome in the nucleus.
S Phase (Synthesis of DNA): is the stage of DNA replication 
(Synthesis).
G2 Phase (second gap): is the stage where the cell replenishes its 
energy stores and synthesizes proteins necessary for chromosome 
manipulation and movement. Some cell organelles are duplicated 
during this stage. Cells may continue growing during the G2 phase.  
Cells make the final preparations before entering into the mitotic 
phase.  ACTIVITY 4. 1  MODELING       
Materials required:  Card board or stiff paper. Glue, threads (with different colours), puncher, coloured 
paper, small beads or  . small seeds (e. g. pea , chickpea, lentils), wool or cotton , Scissor     
Direction: Perform the activity in small group of two students sharing a seat or a table. 
	First create a round boundary by colour thread  to represent the shape and  the cell membrane 
	Fix the piece of rolled wool or cotton  and the colour bead  with glue at the centre  to show the 
position of the nucleus and nucleolus  
	Then , fix   small coloured  paper (punched out),   beads (seeds of similar size or shape)   and  thin 
colour threads with glue to represent the different organelles  as shown in the figure  below
	Draw the diagram on a paper and label the parts without looking the Figure.  Exchange your paper 
with your neighbor and make corrections to the parts labeled wrong. 
	Discuss why nucleus is important for cell division. Identify the difference between nucleus and 
nucleolus.
Endoplasmic reticulum  
(Smooth)   Golgi apparatus  
Endoplasmic reticulum  
(Rough – with ribosomes )    Vacuole  
Cytoplasm  
Nucleolus  Nucleus  Mitochondrion  
Lysosome  
Cell membrane  
Figure 4.1 Stages of the cell 
cycle
82
Grade 10 Biology Unit 4: Cell Cycle                                             The cell division, on the other hand, includes nuclear division – 
Karyokinesis   (mitosis, or, M - stage)   followed by cytoplasmic 
division (Cytokinesis). This ultimately results in two identical 
daughter cells. Each daughter cell grows and starts the cycle the 
mother cell has undergone.   
In the next group activity you will have an opportunity to combine 
skills in computation with geometry to estimate time spent or 
determine the proportion (percentage) of each stage or phase of cell 
cycle using Figure 4.1.  This can help you to create paper time clock 
taking one round cell cycle   as 360 degree and assuming the whole 
cell cycle is completed within 24 hrs.  
The cell cycle   in general and cell division has an internal controlling 
system that enables it to    follow regular pattern. If such regulatory 
system fails to work properly, the cells excessively divide, and this 
may be called “cell madness” . Cancer will occur as a result of failure ACTIVITY 4. 2  CRITICAL THINKING      
Direction:
Form a small group of 2 or 3 students.  Use Figure 4.1 while   measuring    degree of angles for each stage 
with  corresponding time  from the  24 hr ( Hint: 150 = 1 hr )
For efficient way to accomplish your task , first divide  the circle representing  cell cycle into two halves 
down in the middle  with a ruler , and then in half again horizontally.  You will get four quarters of 900. 
This can easily divide your cell cycle into 6 hrs of 150 each.
Once the cell cycle is divided into four segments and the hours will be labelled  ( 24 hr at the top)  with 
one hr ( 150) interval clock wise 
Measure the degree  bounding each stage of  the cell cycle  and   calculate   the exact  time spent  for 
each stage/phase of cell cycle 
Use the formula : ( Degree measured / 3600) X 24 hr.  . Then summarize you results as shown in the 
next table 
Variable Interphase Cell    division               
(mitosis + cytokinesis)Total
G1 S G2
Measured degree
Time spent (hr)
Percentage
Questions
What  is the proportion of time spent in interphase as compared to cell division  ( mitosis &  
cytokinesis) 
Why does a cell spend most of its time in the interphase?
Each stage of cell cycle is not static. What does this mean?
What will happen if cell cycle  is not controlled?  
83
Grade 10 Biology Unit 4: Cell Cycle                                               of controlling cell division, Cancer cells do not respond normally to 
the cell cycle controlling system; they divide in unregulated manner 
and may invade other tissues of the body
The Cell division 
In grade 9, you have learned that a cell is the basic structural and 
functional unit of life. It is their ability to reproduce that distinguishes 
living organisms from non-living organisms. This ability has a cellular 
basis. There must be at least a single cell to have an organism, such 
as the unicellular organism amoeba.  There are also multicellular 
organisms with a huge number of cells, which initially start with 
a single cell or few cells and become multicellular by repeated cell 
division. As it is stated in cell theory, new cells arise from pre-existing 
cells by cell division. This fundamental principle, known as the cell 
doctrine, was originally postulated by Rudolf Virchow in 1858, and it 
provides the basis for the continuity of life.
Cell division is a basic process in all living things where a parent 
or mother cell, divides into two daughter cells. An ordered series 
of events involving cell growth and cell division that produces two 
new daughter cells are termed the cell cycle. Cells on the path to cell 
division proceed through a series of precisely timed and carefully 
regulated stages of growth, DNA replication, and nuclear and 
cytoplasmic division that ultimately produces two identical (clone) 
cells.
As the cell grows the volume of cytoplasm relative to the cell 
membrane will be small that it will have .low surface area to volume Cancer can start when the 
controlling factors over cell 
division and cell growth fail. 
Cancer occurs in the 
absence of growth  factors   
allowing  a cell to divide 
continuously  at very high 
density at the expense of 
other normal cells
Cancer cells can have a  
number of problems: 
• They might not be  able to 
communicate with healthy 
cells
• They may not be able to 
carry out normal cells
• They may not securely 
anchor themselves like 
other cells do, which can 
make  them more likely 
to travel somewhere and 
spread to other parts of the 
body Attention
ACTIVITY 4. 3   INTERVIEWING KEY INFORMANTS     
Direction:
Go	to	the	nearby	health 	centre	around	your	school	or		your		home		
and		gather	information 	by	interviewing	health 	workers	about		
cancer	
Your	interview	should	include	the	following	key	questions
1.	What	is	cancer?
2.	How	does	cancer	affect	a	person?			
3.	What	should	be	done	to	prevent	cancer?	
4.	How	can 	cancer	patients	be	treated?		
 At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
•	recognize		the	causes	of	cell	division	and	
•	explain	the	importance	of	cell	division		 Objectives
Imagine scraping your 
elbow. In addition to 
being uncomfortable, you 
will lose bunch of skin 
cells. How does your body 
make new cells to replace 
cells that are damaged or 
lost as a result of injury 
or accident? 
84
Grade 10 Biology Unit 4: Cell Cycle                                             ratio. As a result   material transport across the cell membrane by 
simple diffusion will be inadequate for the cell to survive. Moreover, 
as the size of the cell increases the controlling power of the nucleus 
is highly minimized. Thus  to solve these problems cell employs a 
mechanism called cell division by which one cell become two or 
more.
You already know the cause of cell division, but it should also be 
noted that the cell is increasing its number as it divides repeatedly.  
The increase in cell number in turn is important for many reasons. 
In unicellular organisms, cell division is a means of reproduction or 
getting new offspring.  For instance, Amoeba is unicellular.  When 
a single cell Amoeba divides, it has increased its population, i.e. 
Number of Amoebae (offspring).  In multicellular organisms, cell 
division is a means of increasing cell number either for growth 
or to replace damaged/dead cells and repair the body. In sexually 
reproducing organisms it occurs around reproductive organs as a 
means of getting gametes or sex cells. .
From your previous lesson on cell cycle (Refer to Figure 4.1) cell 
division continues after G2 stage of the interphase.  Cell division 
consists of two sub divisions
i) Nuclear division (Karyokinesis) – results in the separation and 
distribution of duplicated genetic materials of mother cell (dividing 
cell) to daughter cells by mitosis or meiosis.
ii) Cytokinesis (cytoplasmic division) - is the separation of the 
cytoplasmic components into the daughter cells.
Hereafter, you will learn the pattern of arrangement and redistribution 
of the duplicated genetic material during mitosis and meiosis. 
4.2.1 Mitosis 
 At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
•	outline	the	pattern	of	mitotic	cell	division, 		
•	tell	how	mitosis			produces	daughter	cells	as	an	exact	copy	of	
mother	cell	and	point	out	the	importance	of	mitosis Objectives
Mitosis is a type of nuclear division where duplicated chromosomes 
of a single mother cell are distributed between two identical daughter 
cells, having the same number and kind of hereditary materials 
(chromosomes) as the parent nucleus. As a result, a diploid (2n) 
mother cell gives rise to two diploid (2n) identical daughter cells. What causes a cell to 
divide?  
What is the importance of 
cell division to  organisms ?
ACTIVITY 4.4:  PEER 
DISCUSSION
Direction:
Carefully read the questions 
asked below . Think about 
cell division taking place in 
human body. Discuss with 
a friend sitting next to you. 
Compare your answers with 
your classmates 
•	Where does cell division 
occurs mainly for tissue 
renewal rather than 
growth – Is it in a child or 
in adult human body?
•	Mention our body 
part where cells are 
undergoing continuous 
replacement. Why is this 
so?
What is mitosis?
85
Grade 10 Biology Unit 4: Cell Cycle                                               As illustrated in Figure 4.2, apart from cytokinesis (cytoplasmic 
division), mitosis as nuclear division (Karyokinesis) is divided into 
a series of phases namely; prophase, metaphase, anaphase, and 
telophase.
Figure 4.2 Illustration of cell division by mitosis 
Detailed description of what actually happens at different phases of 
mitosis is presented as follows:
1. Prophase (the “first phase”):  During this phase 
• each duplicated chromosome, composed of two sister chromatids 
and, containing identical genetic material pairs up.  
• the nuclear membrane breaks down, the nucleolus disappears.
• chromosomes shorten, thicken and become visible. 
• the centrosomes begin to move to opposite poles of the cell, and 
spindle fibres emerge from the centrosomes (two in numbers and 
located  outside the nucleus)  - Figure 4.2  	The term mitosis was first 
coined by Walther Flem -
ming in 1882 when he 
discovered that chromo -
somes during cell division 
split longitudinally to dis -
tribute themselves equal -
ly between two daughter 
cells.
	The end result of mitosis 
is growth of the eukary -
otic organism and re -
placement of     damaged 
or dead cells 
	After fertilization (union 
of sperm cell and egg 
cell), the growth of the 
zygote occurs by cell divi -
sion through mitosis into 
the 2 – cell stage, then 4 
– cell stage, 8 – cell stage, 
16 – cell stage, and so. 
This is called Cleavage.Attention  How does a cell divides by mitosis?
Figure 4.3 Sister chromatids: 
Mitotic spindle emerging from  
the centrosomes  What happens in the different phases  while a cell undergoes  
mitosis?
86
Grade 10 Biology Unit 4: Cell Cycle                                             2. Metaphase (arrangement phase) 
During this phase 
• mitotic spindles are fully developed  with centrosomes at the 
opposite poles. 
• chromosomes line up  ( arrange themselves ) end–to–end along 
the centre or metaphase plate ( equatorial plane) of the cell .
• each sister chromatids are  attached to  a spindle fibre  originating 
from opposite  poles.  
3.  Anaphase (migrating phase) 
• During this phase cohesion proteins binding the sister chromatids 
together known as  centromere, breakdown.  
• separated sister chromatids are pulled apart by the mitotic 
spindle which drags one chromatid to one pole and the other 
chromatid to the opposite pole. This will ensure daughter cells 
receive chromosomes that are the same in number and kind.
4. Telophase (a reverse of prophase)
This phase is also known as a reversed prophase because what has 
disappeared during the interphase will reappear during the telophase 
and vice versa. Accordingly,  
• nuclear membrane reappears and surrounds each  set of 
chromosomes  to create two new nuclei  arriving at opposite 
poles.
• The mitotic spindle breaks down and disappears.
Cytokinesis, also known as cytoplasmic division, will take place after 
the four stages of mitosis (nuclear division) are completed. However, 
its completion in animal cell is different from plant cell. As animal 
cell is surrounded only by cell membrane, cytokinesis enables the 
cytoplasm of the mother cell to pinch or constrict in the middle. As 
a result the two daughter cells entirely separate.  However, as plant 
cell is surround by hard cell wall in addition to the cell membrane , 
the cytoplasm cannot simply pinch off  and fully separate; instead a 
new wall  will be laid down  between the two  daughter cells, Thus, 
the two adjacent cells  remained  joined  together  by the middle  wall 
– called middle lamella   
The redistribution of duplicated  chromosomes  through  mitosis   is 
important   to get   two  daughter  cells from single  diploid  mother 
cell that are identical in quality and quantity of  chromosomes..  The 
process of mitosis is important to increase cell number, which in 
turn is essential for growth.  We, human beings, after the union of  What is the significance 
of cell division through  
mitosis?
87
Grade 10 Biology Unit 4: Cell Cycle                                               haploid  ( n) sperm and  haploid ( n) egg  started as a zygote, which 
is diploid (2n). Then the zygote by repeated cell division through 
mitosis develops into multicellular organism. This is how we human 
beings are made up of million cells. 
Cells have a finite life span; they wear out or become damaged; so 
they need to be replaced continuously.  The process of growth, repair 
and replacement of dead cells all rely on cell division through mitosis.    
Unicellular organisms like   Amoeba also use cell division through 
mitosis to increase their number or population. 
Spindle fiber – is long protein fiber extending from structures 
called centrioles. It starts from the pole of the cell and extends up to 
the centre, where it is linked to duplicated chromosomes arranged 
for distribution. It is necessary to pull chromosomes separated  
towards the pole during the anaphase stage of cell division
Homologous chromosomes  – are couples of one maternal and 
one paternal chromosome paired up during fertilization. They are 
paired chromosomes, each of which represents a parent for a unit 
character such as height, body colour, sex etc. The best analogy for 
homologus chromosomes, is paired  shoe with the same number . 
Every person like the unit character   has same number , say shoe 
size  41, two  in number and fit to the  right and left feet of Mr/Mrs   
”X” or “Y” .  Likewise, in humans each diploid (2n) body (somatic) 
cell has 23 pairs of homologous chromosomes, giving a total of 46 
(2 X 23) chromosomes.  
Sister chromatids:  Two copies of one maternal or paternal 
chromosome linked together by cohesive protein on the centromere. Key terms  http://www.differencebetween.
net/science/difference-between-
homologous-chromosomes-and-
sister-chromatids/#ixzz72kDLiFk2
ACTIVITY 4.5    GROUP WORK     
Direction:
The figure below shows different phases 
of mitosis in onion cells  as seen under 
the microscope 
Form a small group and carefully look 
at the figure, and based on your lesson 
about mitosis, identify the phases repre -
sented by letters “A” to “E”. Compare 
your answer with other groups and de -
fend yourself if there is any difference.
88
Grade 10 Biology Unit 4: Cell Cycle                                             4.2.2 Meiosis 
 At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
•	outline		the	pattern	of	cell	division	by	meiosis,
•	tell	the	importance	of	meiosis		and	
•	point	out	the	difference	between	mitosis	and	meiosis Objectives
The process of meiosis is a characteristic feature of organisms that 
reproduce sexually.  It occurs in reproductive organs such as ovaries 
of female animals, testes of male animals, anther and ovules of 
flowering plants. Meiosis involves two fissions of the nucleus giving 
rise to four gametes or sex cells, each possessing half the number 
of chromosomes (n) present in the mother cell. Meiosis is called 
reduction division,  as the final daughter cells are haploid (n) as 
compared to the diploid ( 2n) mother division.  
What would happen if the human gametes (sperm cell and egg cell), 
had 46 chromosomes like the other body cells?  The answer is simple 
that there will be 92 chromosomes in the zygote, which will not be 
normal. Thus, during gametogenesis (gamete formation) in human 
ovaries and testes, the 46 chromosomes in the initial mother will be 
reduced by half to 23 chromosomes by meiosis. As a result, the sperm 
or egg cells nuclei will have 23 chromosomes (haploid, abbreviated 
as n).  So, when sperm and egg join together at fertilization, a zygote 
that contains the normal number of 46 chromosomes (23 pairs, 
Diploid abbreviated as 2n) will be formed. 
Figure 4.4 depicts the different phases of meiosis I and II. A short 
description of each phase is presented in Table 4.1  What is meiosis?  How 
does it differ from 
mitosis?
Why is meiosis so 
important?
Figure 4.4 Illustration of 
meiosis I and Meiosis II
89
Grade 10 Biology Unit 4: Cell Cycle                                               Table 4.1 Description of the different stages of Meiosis I and Meiosis II 
Stage Description
Prophase I Each chromosome appears shortened and thickened form  two chromatids
Homologous chromosomes pair up
Metaphase I Chromosomes align on spindle fiber; lining up in the middle  or metaphase plate 
Anaphase IThe centromere joining sister chromatids do not separate 
The pair of chromatids from each homologous pair moves to the end (pole) of the 
cell.  
Reduction to haploid (n) will take place because  homologous  chromosomes of  male 
and female parents separate
Telophase IThe nuclear membrane reforms and the cells begin to divide.
In some cells, the cell  continues  to full cytokinesis  while in other cells there may be 
prolonged interphase but with no further DNA duplication
Prophase II New spindles are formed and the chromosome, still made up of paired chromatids 
moves toward the middle of the cell.
Metaphase 
II The chromosomes line up in the metaphase plate , with the spindle  attached to the 
sister chromatids  of each chromosome coming from the opposite poles. 
Anaphase II The centromeres divide and sister chromatids separate  and pulled to the opposite 
ends of each cell
Telophase IINuclear membrane reappears, the chromosomes return to the interphase state 
Cytokinesis follows giving four daughter cells each with half the chromosome num -
ber of the initial parent ( mother) cell
ACTIVITY 4.6   DEMONSTRATION  
Direction
•  With your small group (two pairs  of neighbouring students)  discuss and   attempt the following 
questions/task
Is it Meiosis I or Meiosis II that is similar to mitosis? Why so? 
What are the basic similarities between Mitosis and meiosis)?
• Prepare a table of comparison that shows   difference between Mitosis and meiosis 
•   Let students bring threads with different colours (red and green). Show them how they start with  
homologus chromosomes  (paternal and maternal   chromosomes represented by red and green  
threads).  Demonstrate  the  different stages of nuclear division  with small pieces of the colour 
threads  and  show the result of chromosomal duplication  and redistribution  that occur  first in 
mitosis and then in meiosis 
• Ask students to repeat what has been demonstrated and identify the difference in  mitosis and 
meiosis . 
90
Grade 10 Biology Unit 4: Cell Cycle                                             4.3 Renowned Ethiopian Geneticist 
 
 At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
•	appreciate		the	work	of		a	renowned		geneticist		and	
•	look	for	more	Ethiopian	Geneticist		who	contributed	a	lot	to	
their	field			 Objectives  
Dr. Melaku Worede
Dr. Melaku Worede, a geneticist and agronomist, is renowned for 
employing science to benefit poor farmers and saving Africa’s seeds 
from extinction. He was awarded the “Right livelihood Award” in 
1989” for preserving Ethiopia’s genetic wealth by building one of the 
finest seed conservation centres in the world.”  He played key role 
in the establishment of the Plant Genetic Resource centre in Addis 
Ababa, where he became Director in 1979 and served for more than 
14 years – until retirement  
After retirement, Dr. Melaku developed his pioneer work on a 
framing based native seed (landrace) conservation, enhancement 
and utilization. He was able to develop and grow locally adapted 
native seeds (e.g durum wheat) without commercial fertilizers or 
other chemicals. He was able to show that his native seeds exceeded 
their high in put counterparts on the average by 10 – 15% and the 
original farmers’ cultivars by 20 – 25% in yield.  
 
ACTIVITY  4.6   PEER DISCUSSION    
 Direction  
• Carefully read  the work of Dr Melaku  and share your 
impression with a friend sitting 
• with you  
• Form a group of four students and look for more renowned 
Ethiopian Genetists from books and /or the internet. Organize a 
report to share with your classmates.
91
Grade 10 Biology Unit 4: Cell Cycle                                               • A cell cycle is a sequence of events that takes place in the parent cell as a means of distributing 
genetic materials thereby forming daughter cells. There are two main divisions of the cell 
cycle: Interphase and Cell division. 
• Interphase is the stage of preparation where a cell exhibits growth  and DNA (genetic material 
synthesis)
• Cell division is nuclear division either by mitosis or meiosis followed by cytoplasmic division 
(cytokinesis). 
• Cell division is a basic process in all living things where a parent  or mother cell , divides into 
two cells, called daughter cells . 
• Cell division is a means of growth and replacing damaged or dead cells in multicellular 
organisms. It is equivalent to reproduction in unicellular organisms.
• Mitosis is a division of the somatic (body) cells to form identical daughter cells. It has four 
stages namely prophase, metaphase, anaphase, and telophase. 
• Meiosis is a division of reproductive cells, resulting in daughter cells sex cells (gametes) with 
half of the chromosomes in the initial or mother cell. 
• In meiosis a cell divides twice, Meiosis I and Meiosis II, resulting in four daughter cells.
• In meiosis I, homologous chromosomes separate and move to opposite cells. This is a 
reduction by half, going from diploid (2n) to haploid (n).
• In meiosis II, sister chromatids separate and move to opposite poles of the cell. 
• Meiosis occurs only in reproductive organs such as testes and ovaries while mitosis occurs in 
body (somatic) cells. Unit Summary
92
Grade 10 Biology Unit 4: Cell Cycle                                             True – False items: Say “ True” or “False” for the following statements  on your exercise book. 
1.  It is meiosis I that resembles mitosis. 
2. Homologus chromosomes are duplicated one parent chromosomes.  
3. Meiosis results in four haploid daughter cells.
4. DNA duplication is the longest phase of the interphase.
5. Prokaryotic organisms like Bacteria do not divide by mitosis. 
Matching items : Match the terms under “Column B”  with the descriptions under “Column A”
Column A Column B
1. known as cytoplasmic division Anaphase 
2. paired maternal and paternal chromosomes  Cytokinesis 
3. pull chromosomes to opposite  ends  of a cell Homologous chromosomes 
4. arrangement of chromosomes at the metaphase plate  Interphase  
5. separation of  sister chromatids   Metaphase 
6. duplicated  one parent chromosmes  Sister chromatids  
Spindle fiber
Telophase 
Short answers
1. What is the importance of meiosis to sexually reproducing organisms?
2. Mention at least two important features of cancer cells.
3. What is the difference between interphase and prophase?
4. What would happen if there is no cytoplasmic division at the end of telophase?
If a cell is having 2n=40 divide by meiosis
A. How many cells are formed at the end of meiosis i? meiosis ii?
B. How many chromosomes are there in each daughter cells at the end of meiosis i? meiosis ii? 
C .How many set of chromosome(s)/is/ are there at the end of meiosis i? meiosis II?Review Questions
93
Grade 10 Biology  Content  Learning objectives
5.1. Digestive system
5.2.  Circulatory and 
Lymphatic system
5.2.1. Blood donation
5.2.2. Diseases of 
the circulatory and 
lymphatic systems 
(leukemia, varicose 
vein, elephantiasis, 
cardiovascular diseases)
5.3. Breathing system 
5.4. The excretory system
5.5. The immune system
5.6.  Renowned Physicians 
in Ethiopia• Discuss the structure and function of the digestive system (alimentary 
canal and accessory organs).
• Classify the types of digestion along the alimentary canal
• List the end products of carbohydrates, proteins, and fats after complete 
digestion
• Express the site of absorption of digested food, minerals, vitamins, and 
water
• Explore structural adaptations of the small intestine for the absorption
• Differentiate the absorption routs of different end products of digestion 
(hint: lacteals, capillaries)
• Group enzymes of the digestive system based on their roles and pH 
• Demonstrate the structure of the heart using a heart model/ diagram
• Differentiate between pulmonary and systemic circulations.
• Compare and contrast arteries and veins based on their structures and 
functions
• Debate on the importance of blood donation and its health implications 
on the donors and recipients.
• Discuss the key functions and components of the lymphatic system.
• Define the immune system
• Discuss the types of immunity (innate and acquired). 
• Relate the lymphatic system with the immune system
• Discuss the diseases of the circulatory and lymphatic systems (leukemia, 
varicose vein, elephantiasis, cardiovascular diseases)
• Draw and label the human breathing and excretory systems
• Show the link between the human breathing system and the circulatory 
system
• Demonstrate the mechanism of breathing using locally available 
materials
• Design a model of one of the systems (excretory, circulatory, digestive 
systems) using locally available materials
• Examine the effects of smoking and cannabis on the normal functioning 
of the breathing systems.
       Unit 5: Human Biology                                               
94
Grade 10 Biology Unit 5: Human Biology5.1 The Digestive System
 At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
•		discuss	the	structure	and	function	of	the	digestive	system	(alimentary	canal	and	accessory	
organs),
•	 classify	the	types	of	digestion	along	the	alimentary	canal,
•	 list	the	end	products	of	carbohydrates, 	proteins, 	and	fats	after	complete	digestion,
•	 express	the	site	of	absorption	of	digested	food, 	minerals, 	vitamins, 	and	water,
•	 explore	structural	adaptations	of	the	small	intestine	for	the	absorption,
•		differentiate	the	absorption	routs	of	different	end	products	of	digestion	(hint:	lacteals, 	
capillaries), 	and
•	 group	enzymes	of	the	digestive	system	based	on	their	roles	and	pH. Objectives
All living organisms need nutrients to survive, plants can obtain 
nutrients from their roots and the energy molecules required for 
cellular function through the process of photosynthesis. Animals, 
however, obtain their nutrients through the consumption of other 
organisms. At the cellular level, the biological molecules necessary 
for animal function are amino acids, lipid molecules, nucleotides, 
and simple sugars. However, the food consumed consists of protein, 
fat, and complex carbohydrates. Animals must convert these 
macromolecules into the simple molecules required for maintaining 
cellular function. The conversion of the food consumed to the 
nutrients required is a multistep process involving digestion and 
absorption. During digestion, food particles are broken down into 
smaller components, which are later absorbed by the body. This 
happens by both physical means, such as chewing and by chemical 
means, via enzyme-catalyzed reactions. These processes take place in 
the human digestive system step-wise.
The human digestive system is composed of four digestive processes: 
1. Ingestion  - the taking in of nutrients, in the mouth,
2.  Digestion  - the breakdown of complex organic molecules into 
smaller components by enzymes step-wise, physical, and chemical 
processes that begins in the oral cavity and extends to the small 
intestine,
3.  Absorption  - the transport of digested nutrients from the small 
intestine to the cells of the body though finger like projection called 
villi in the small intestine, and
What do you know about the digestive system?
Activity 5.1 THINK-PAIR-
SHARE
In your previous grades, 
you have studied about the 
digestive system of human 
beings. Now, be in groups 
of 2-3 students on the same 
desk and discuss what you 
know about the digestive 
system and the process that 
takes place beginning from 
the mouth to the anus and 
let one of you share it to the 
whole class.
What are the components 
and processes of the 
digestive system?
95
Grade 10 Biology Unit 5: Human Biology4. Egesting  - the removal of food waste from the body. The distinction 
between excretion and egestion is based on the type of wastes excreted 
by an organism. Undigested food that remains after digestion is 
expelled in animals during the egestion process. Excretion is the 
process through which metabolic wastes are expelled in both plants 
and animals.
The digestive tract of adult humans is normally 6.5 m to 9m long. It 
stores and breaks down organic molecules into simpler components. 
Physical (mechanical) digestion begins in the mouth, where food 
is chewed and formed a bolus (the Greek word for the ball) by the 
tongue. Physical digestion breaks food into smaller pieces, increasing 
the surface area for chemical digestion.
The chemical digestion of carbohydrate (starch) starts in the oral 
cavity by an enzyme called salivary amylase or ptyalin. The food is 
then swallowed and enters the esophagus a long tube that connects 
the mouth to the stomach. Using peristalsis , wave-like smooth-
muscle contractions, the muscles of the esophagus push the food 
toward the stomach. The stomach contents are extremely acidic, with 
a pH between 1.5 and 2.5. This acidity kills microorganisms, breaks 
down food tissues, and activates digestive enzymes. The chemical 
digestion of protein starts in the stomach by the enzyme pepsin.
Further breakdown of food takes place in the small intestine  where 
bile is produced by the liver, and enzymes produced by the small 
intestine and the pancreas, continue the process of digestion. The 
smaller molecules are absorbed into the bloodstream through the 
epithelial cells lining the walls of the small intestine. The waste 
material travels onto the large intestine  where water is absorbed and 
the drier waste material is compacted into feces;  it is stored in the 
rectum  until it is excreted through the anus.
The Oral Cavity
In the oral cavity, both physical and chemical digestion begins. It is 
the point of entry (ingestion) of food into the digestive system. The 
process that takes place in the mouth includes:
1. the food is broken into smaller particles by mastication, the 
chewing action of the teeth.
2. saliva, the watery fluid produced by the salivary glands contains Do you have any idea 
about the relationship 
between biology and 
other sciences?
Where in the alimentary canal does the chemical digestion 
begin?
Activity 5.2 Group work
Form a group of 3-4 students 
and:
1. discuss the structure and 
functions of the digestive 
system;
2. draw, label and study the 
route of the alimentary 
canal and the types of 
digestion (mechanical 
and chemical) along the 
alimentary canal; 
3. discuss digestion end 
products; and
4. support your activity 
using virtual lab (digestive 
system animation) 
using internet and other 
resources.
If one ingests glucose 
where will it be digested?
What is the process of digestion that takes place in the mouth?
96
Grade 10 Biology Unit 5: Human Biologyamylase enzyme, and breaks down starches into simpler molecules.
3. saliva dissolves food particles and makes it possible to taste what is 
being eaten.
4. saliva lubricates the food so that it can be swallowed. 
5. we detect the flavour when food particles dissolved in saliva 
penetrate the cells of the taste buds located on the tongue and 
cheeks.
6. the tongue, positions and mixes food and forms a ball of food called 
bolus ready to be swallowed.
The teeth
The teeth are important structures for physical digestion ( Figure 5. 1 ). 
There are 4 types of teeth:
Incisors: are eight chisel-shaped teeth at the front of your mouth 
specialized for cutting.
Canine:  teeth that are sharp, dagger-shaped specialized for tearing. 
Premolar:  teeth that are broad flattened specialized for grinding. 
Molars: teeth tend to be even broader and have cusps that are even 
more flattened. They are designed for crushing and grinding food. 
The last set of molars is the wisdom teeth , so-called because they 
usually do not emerge until we reach about 16 to 20 years of age. Each 
tooth is covered with enamel, which is the hardest substance in the 
human body.Activity 5.3 Individual 
work
Dry your tongue and 
distribute a small amount of 
salt on it to dissolve in saliva. 
What do you feel? Have you 
detected any test? Why?
Activity 5.4 Group work
In group of 2-3 students, 
answer the following 
questions:
• Draw and label parts of a 
single teeth.
• Classify your teeth 
according to their 
functions.
• What are the reasons for 
the teeth decay?
Figure 5.1 The structure and types of teethWhat is the importance of teeth in digestion? Can you mention 
the different types of teeth?
97
Grade 10 Biology Unit 5: Human BiologyExternal and internal structures of teeth
The teeth are the hardest substances in the human body. Besides 
being essential for chewing, the teeth play an important role in 
speech. Parts of the teeth include:
Enamel:  the hardest, white outer part of the tooth. Enamel is mostly 
made of calcium  phosphate, a rock-hard mineral.
Dentin:  a layer underlying the enamel. It is a hard tissue that contains 
microscopic tubes. When the enamel is damaged, heat or cold can 
enter the tooth through these paths and cause sensitivity or pain.
Pulp:  the softer, living inner structure of teeth. Blood  vessels and 
nerves run through the pulp of the teeth.
Periodontal ligament - tissue that helps to hold the teeth tightly 
against the jaw.
Roots - is the part of the tooth that extends into the bone and holds 
the tooth in place. It makes up approximately two-thirds of the tooth
Gums.  Gums, also called gingiva, are the fleshy, pink connective 
tissue that’s attached to  the neck of the tooth and the cementum.
Crown:  the crown of a tooth is the top portion of the tooth that is 
visible.
Human dentition
The conventional way of expressing the total number of teeth in the 
human beings are represented: incisor(I), canines(C), molars(M) 
and premolars(P). It gives a set like I:C:P:M. For example, if it is 
given 2:1:2:3 for upper teeth then, it indicates 2 incisors, 1 canine, 2 
premolars and 3 molars of the upper mouth on one side. Include the 
dental formula
The dental formula of human beings (adults):
 (2123/2123) × 2 = 32(2123/2123) × 2 = 32
There are 2 incisors, 1 canine, 2 premolars and 3 molars. In adults, 
dentition pertains to all types of teeth development. In a normal 
adult there are 32 teeth. There are two types of dentition: temporary 
and permanent . There are 20 teeth in the temporary dentition and 
32 teeth in the permanent dentition.  In a child, there are 20 teeth 
present which are called milk teeth  or deciduous teeth . These teeth 
grow at the age of 6 years. i. e.
(2102/2102)×2=20(2102/2102) × 2=20. These are two incisors, 1 
canine and 2 molars.
In order to represent the total number of the teeth in the jaw or 
98
Grade 10 Biology Unit 5: Human Biologymouth, the whole formula is multiplied by two as the formula for one 
side of the mouth. Both monkeys and human beings have the same 
set of teeth and the same dental formula.
Keeping teeth health
Adult teeth should last you all through your life. However, this 
doesn’t always happen, because your teeth can be affected by bacteria 
that cause dental caries. There are many different bacteria that are 
found naturally in your mouth. These bacteria, combined with 
food and saliva, form a thin film known as plaque on your teeth. If 
these bacteria are given a sugar-rich diet (in other words, if you eat 
a lot of sweet, sugary food) they produce a lot of acid waste. This 
acid attacks and dissolves the tough enamel coating of your teeth. 
Once through the enamel, the acid also dissolves away some of the 
dentine and then the bacteria can get into the inside of your tooth. 
The bacteria will then reproduce and feed, eating away at your tooth 
until they reach the nerves of the pulp cavity causing toothache. The 
same bacteria can affect your gums, causing periodontal disease . 
The symptoms include tender gums, bleeding when you clean your 
teeth and eventually the possible loss of all your teeth, not from tooth 
decay but from gum disease. Taking in lots of acidic food and drink, 
such as fruits and cola, can also weaken the enamel on your teeth. 
This is particularly the case if you clean your teeth straight after an 
acidic drink such as fruit juice or cola, when the softening effect on 
the enamel is strongest and brushing your teeth can actually wear the 
enamel away.
Tooth and gum disease are extremely common all over the world. 
They cause pain, bad breath, loss of teeth and difficulty eating. The 
good news is that they can both be avoided, especially if you have 
good dental care available. Ways to avoid tooth decay include: 
• Regular brushing of your teeth and gums twice a day. This removes 
the plaque from the teeth, preventing the build-up of a sticky, 
acidic film over the enamel.
• Avoiding sweet, sugary foods – if the bacteria in your teeth are 
deprived of sugar, they cannot make acidic waste and your teeth 
are safe.
• Have regular dental check-ups. A dentist can clean your teeth 
more thoroughly than you can, and any early signs of decay can be 
treated. Your teeth won’t heal themselves, but any tooth decay can 
be removed and replaced by a filling.
The Esophagus
The swallowed food travels from the mouth to the stomach by way of 
the esophagus. The bolus of food stretches the walls of the esophagus, 
99
Grade 10 Biology Unit 5: Human Biologyactivating muscles that set up waves of rhythmic contractions called 
peristalsis. Peristaltic contractions, which are involuntary, move food 
along the gastrointestinal tract (Figure 5. 2). Peristaltic action will 
move food or fluid from the esophagus to the stomach. Look at the 
process of peristalsis in figure 5.2.
Figure 5.2 Rhythmic contractions of muscle move food along the 
digestive tract
The stomach
The stomach is the site of food storage and initial protein digestion. 
The stomach contains three layers of muscle, which run in different 
directions so that the muscle contractions can churn the food (Figure 
5.3 (a)). The movement of food to and from the stomach is regulated 
by circular muscles called sphincters. Sphincters act like the draw 
strings on a bag. Contraction of the lower esophageal sphincter 
(LES) closes the opening to the stomach, while its relaxation allows 
food to enter. The lower esophageal sphincter prevents food and acid 
from being regurgitated up into the esophagus. A second sphincter, 
the pyloric sphincter, regulates the movement of food and stomach 
acids into the small intestine (Figure 5.3(b)).
 
Figure 5.3 a) Muscle is responsible for the contractions of the stomach 
b) Sphincters regulate the movement of food.
The J-shaped stomach has numerous ridges that allow it to expand so 
that it can store about1.5L of food. Millions of cells line the inner wall 
of the stomach. Activities in the stomach:Activity 5.5 Answer to the 
questions
After studying the digestive 
system in the mouth, answer 
the following questions:
1. Discuss the structure and 
function of the teeth.
2. What are the functions of 
saliva?
3. How does chewing assist 
in the digestion of food?
4. What are amylase 
enzymes, and why are they 
necessary?
5. How is food moved along 
the esophagus?
What are the processes of 
digestion that take place 
in the stomach?
A B
100
Grade 10 Biology Unit 5: Human Biology1. the cells secrete the various stomach fluids, called gastric fluids or 
gastric juice , that aid digestion, 
2. contractions of the stomach mix the food with the gastric fluids, 
and
3. it is involved in both physical (churning action if stomach wall) and 
chemical digestion(e.g. digestion of proteins by the action of enzyme 
pepsin).
Approximately 500mL of the fluids in the stomach are produced 
following a large meal.
Gastric fluid includes:
1. mucus, 
2. hydrochloric acid (Hydrochloric acid (HCl)), 
3. pepsinogens, and other substances. 
Hydrochloric acid kills many harmful substances that are ingested with 
food. It also converts pepsinogen into its active form, pepsin, which is a 
protein-digesting enzyme. Pepsin breaks the long amino acid chains in 
proteins into shorter chains, called polypeptides.
The pH inside the stomach normally ranges between 2.0 and 3.0 but 
may approach pH 1.0. Acids with a pH of 2.0 can dissolve fibers in a 
rug. It is the high acidity of hydrochloric acid that makes it effective 
at killing pathogens and allows pepsin to do its work.
A layer of alkaline mucus protects the stomach lining from being 
digested. Pepsinogen passes across the cell membrane and is 
activated by Hydrochloric acid (HCl) to become pepsin. The pepsin 
breaks down the proteins in the food, but not the proteins of the 
stomach’s cells because these proteins are protected by the mucous 
layer. The esophagus does not have a protective mucous layer, so if the 
lower esophageal sphincter (LES) is weak, stomach acid may enter the 
esophagus and damage its lining. This causes pain known as heartburn.
The partially digested food and gastric juice mixture are called chyme.  
Gastric emptying occurs within two to six hours after a meal. Only a 
small amount of chyme is released into the small intestine at a time. 
The movement of chyme from the stomach into the small intestine 
is regulated by hormones, stomach distension, and muscular reflexes 
that influence the pyloric sphincter.  The low pH of the stomach will 
denature the amylase and lipase  that were secreted in the mouth. 
Therefore, over time, the chemical digestion of starches and fats will 
decrease in the stomach and their further digestion will take place in 
the small intestine.What is the composition 
of gastric juice?
How does the stomach safely store these strong chemicals, both 
of which dissolve the proteins that makeup cells?
What do we call the 
partially digested food in 
the stomach?
101
Grade 10 Biology Unit 5: Human BiologyAbsorption in the stomach
Although the stomach absorbs few of the products of digestion, it can 
absorb many other substances, including glucose and other simple 
sugars, amino acids, and some fat soluble substances, water, specific 
vitamins, and alcohol, etc. 
The small intestine 
The small intestine is up to 7 m in length, but only 2.5 cm in diameter 
(Figure 5.4a ). Most chemical digestion takes place in the small 
intestine. Parts of the small intestine:
1. duodenum  the first 25 cm to 30 cm of the small intestine where 
the majority of digestion occurs,
2. jejunum  is the second component of the small intestine and
3. ileum  the third component
The small intestine secretes digestive enzymes and moves its contents 
along by peristalsis. The stomach absorbs some water, specific 
vitamins, some medicines, and alcohol, but most absorption takes 
place within the small intestine. Long finger like projections called 
villi (singular: villus) greatly increase the surface area of the small 
intestine ( Figure 5.4(b) ). One estimate suggests that villi account for 
a tenfold increase in surface area for absorption. The cells that make 
up the lining of each villus have microvilli, which are fine, threadlike 
extensions of the membrane that further increase the surface for 
absorption.
Figure 5.4 Parts of the digestive system and the absorption villi
Figure 5.4 Parts of the digestive system and the absorption villiWhat is the reason for the 
release of small amount 
of chyme in to the small 
intestine at a time?
A B
102
Grade 10 Biology Unit 5: Human BiologyEach villus is supplied with a capillary network that intertwines with 
lymph vessels called lacteals  that transport materials. Some nutrients 
are absorbed by diffusion, but some nutrients are actively transported 
from the digestive tract. Monosaccharides and amino acids are 
absorbed into the capillary networks; fats are absorbed into the 
lacteals (Figure 5.5).
                                    
 
The accessory organs
The organs discussed above are the organs of the digestive tract 
through which food passes. Accessory organs add secretions and 
enzymes that break down food into nutrients. Accessory organs 
include:
• the salivary glands, 
• the pancreas, 
• the liver, and 
• the gall bladder. 
The secretions of the pancreas, liver, and gallbladder are regulated 
by hormones in response to food consumption. The liver is the 
largest internal organ  in humans and it plays an important role in 
the digestion of fats and detoxifying blood. The liver produces bile, 
which is a digestive juice that is required for the breakdown of fats in 
the duodenum. The liver also processes the absorbed vitamins and 
fatty acids and synthesizes many plasma proteins. The gallbladder is 
a small organ that aids the liver by storing bile and concentrating bile 
salts. The pancreas secretes bicarbonate that neutralizes the acidic 
chyme  and a variety of enzymes ( trypsin, amylase, and lipase ) for 
the digestion of proteins, carbohydrates, and fats, respectively. The 
details of the accessory organs are given below.
Figure 5.5 Anatomy of a villus, 
with the lactealActivity 5.6 Group work
In a group of 2-3 students, discuss:
1. the sites of absorption of digested foods, minerals, vitamins, 
water;
2. the structural adaptation of the small intestine (villi with 
lacteals and capillaries) for absorption. 
3. Present you work to the class. 
Finally, your teacher will summarize the sites of absorption; 
adaptations of the small intestine for absorption and the roles of 
lacteals and capillaries.
What are accessory 
organs?
103
Grade 10 Biology Unit 5: Human BiologyPancreas
The pancreatic secretions contain enzymes that promote the 
breakdown of the three major components of food: proteins, 
carbohydrates, and lipids . Pancreatic secretions contain the following 
digestive enzymes:
Trypsin - a protein-digesting enzyme called trypsinogen is released 
from the pancreas. Once trypsinogen reaches the small intestine, an 
enzyme called enterokinase converts the inactive trypsinogen into 
trypsin,  which acts on the partially digested proteins. Trypsin breaks 
down long-chain polypeptides  into shorter-chain peptides.
Erepsins - are released from the pancreas and small intestine. They 
complete protein digestion by breaking the bonds between short-
chain peptides, releasing individual amino acids.
Amylase-  continue the digestion of carbohydrates that begun in the 
mouth by salivary amylase. The intermediate-size chains are broken 
down into disaccharides. The small intestine releases disaccharide 
enzymes, called disaccharidases , which complete the digestion of 
carbohydrates
Lipases -enzymes released from the pancreas that breaks down lipids 
(fats). There are two different types of lipid-digesting enzymes:
Pancreatic lipase , the most common lipase, breaks down fats into 
fatty acids and glycerol.
Phospholipase acts on phospholipids.
The summary of the enzymes found in the small intestine, where 
they are produced, and their actions that take place are given in Table 
5.1 below.
Table 5.1 Digestion in the Small Intestine
Liver and Gallbladder
The liver continually produces fluid called bile.  Bile contains bile 
salts, which aid fat digestion. When the stomach is empty, bile is stored 
and concentrated in the gallbladder. When there are fats in the small 
intestine, the hormones trigger the gall bladder to release bile salts. Activity 5.7 Discussion
As you already know, food 
moves from the stomach to 
the small intestine. Partially 
digested food reaches the 
small intestine already 
soaked in HCl and pepsin. 
How are the cells of the 
small intestine protected 
from the effects of HCl and 
pepsin?  Discuss this issue 
with your classmates after 
collecting information from 
the internet or books.
Enzyme Produced by Reaction
lipase pancreas fat droplets + H 2O → glycerol + fatty 
acids
trypsin pancreas protein + H 2O → peptides
erepsin pancreas, small intestine peptides + H 2O → amino acids
pancreatic amylases pancreas starch + H 2O → maltose
maltase small intestine maltose + H 2O → glucose
What is the importance of 
liver?
104
Grade 10 Biology Unit 5: Human BiologyOnce inside the small intestine, the bile salts:
Emulsify or breakdown, large fat globules. The breakdown of fat globules 
into smaller droplets is physical digestion, not chemical digestion 
since chemical bonds are not broken. Physical digestion prepares the 
fat for chemical digestion by increasing the exposed surface area on 
which fat-digesting enzymes, such as pancreatic lipase, can work.
Bile also contains pigments. The liver breaks down haemoglobin from 
red blood cells and stores the products in the gallbladder for removal. 
The characteristic brown colour of feces results from haemoglobin 
breakdown.
Stores glycogen and vitamins A, B 12, and D.
Detoxify many harmful substances in the body. Harmful chemicals 
are made soluble and can be dissolved in the blood and eliminated in 
the urine. One of the more common poisons is alcohol. 
Large Intestine
The human large intestine is much smaller in length compared to the 
small intestine but larger in diameter. It has three parts: the cecum, 
the colon, and the rectum . The cecum joins the ileum to the colon 
and is the receiving pouch for the waste matter. The colon is home 
to many bacteria or intestinal flora that aid in the digestive processes. 
The colon has four regions, the ascending colon, the transverse 
colon, the descending colon and the sigmoid colon (Figure 5.4a ). 
The main functions of the colon are to extract the water and mineral 
salts from undigested food, and to store waste material.
Chemical digestion is complete by the time food reaches the large 
intestine ( Figure 5.4a ). The colon, the largest part of the large intestine, 
must store waste long enough to reabsorb water from it. During this 
time, some inorganic salts, minerals, and vitamins are also absorbed 
with the water.
The large intestine houses bacteria, such as Escherichia	 coli	
(E.	coli), 	which are essential to life and use waste materials to 
synthesize vitamins B and K. Cellulose, the long-chain carbohydrate 
characteristic of plant cell walls, reaches the large intestine undigested. 
Although cellulose cannot be broken down by humans, it serves 
an important function: cellulose provides bulk. As wastes build up 
in the large intestine, receptors in the wall of the intestine provide 
information to the central nervous system , which, in turn, prompts 
a bowel movement. The bowel movement ensures the removal of 
potentially toxic wastes from the body. Individuals who do not eat 
sufficient amounts of cellulose (roughage or fiber) have fewer bowel 
movements. This means that wastes and toxins remain in their bodies 
for longer periods. Scientists have determined that cancer of the colon Why liver is said to 
be unusual organ 
with regard to blood 
circulation?
Activity 5.8 Library/
Internet search
Conduct library/internet 
search on groups of enzymes 
associated with digestion 
of different food staffs, the 
sites of their action and the 
required environment (pH) 
for each group. Finally, 
present your findings to the 
class. for discussion.
105
Grade 10 Biology Unit 5: Human Biologycan be related to diet. Individuals who eat mostly processed, highly 
refined foods are more likely to develop cancer of the colon.
The rectum ( Figure 5.4a ) stores feces until defecation. The feces are 
propelled using peristaltic movements during elimination. The anus 
is an opening at the far-end of the digestive tract and is the exit point 
for the waste material. Two sphincters regulate the exit of feces, the 
inner sphincter is involuntary and the outer sphincter is voluntary.
Table 5.2 Summary of digestion in human alimentary canal
Region of gut Glands and 
secretionEnzymes and opti -
mum pHFood digested, products and other activity
Mouth: mastica -
tion by jaws and 
tongueSalivary glands 
:saliva 1-2 
liters/daily1. pH-7, slightly 
acid in adults, 
slightly alkali to 
neutral in children
2. amylase1.mucin lubricates food bolus
2.(A) starch(amylase)----dextrins
    (B) cooked starch ----maltose
Oesophagus None None Food bolus moves by peristalsis
Stomach churn -
ing action. Tem -
porary storage 1 
to3 hrsGastric gland, 
stomach 
wall-gastric 
juice
2-4L; stores 
daily1. pH 1, strongly 
acidic
2. rennin(in young 
children)
3. lipase(in young 
children)
4. pepsin1. Hydrochloric acid (HCl) is bacteriocidal
2. clots milk protein-caesin
3. lipids---fatty acids and glycerine
4. proteins—amino acids
Absorption: water, salts, vitamins and ethanol
Duodenum(Ac -
cessory organ 
secretions)1.liver- bile 
juice, 700CM3-
1.2 litres daily
2 pancre -
as-pancreatic 
juices, 700Cm3 
daily1. pH 7-8, slightly 
alkaline
2. no enzyme1. alters pH of stomach contents
2. bile salts emulsify or cream lipids
1. pH 7-8,slightly 
alkaline
2. amylase
3. lipase
4. Trypsin
5.nuclease1.food as chime propelled by peristalsis
2. starch(amylase)------maltose
3. lipids---- fatty acids and glycerol
4. peptones---- short peptides
5. nucleic acids----nucleotides
Small intestine 
and duodenumGlands in 
intestine  and 
duodenum 
wall-intestinal 
juice, 200cm31. pH 7-8
2. entrokinase 
changes trypsino -
gen into trypsin
3.lipase
4.glycosi -
dases-maltase, 
lactase, sucrase1--------------------------
2. dipeptides, peptides-------amino acids
3. lipids---fatty acids and glycerol(propanetriol)
4. maltase----maltose into glucose molecules
 Lactase-----lactose into glucose and galactose
 Sucrose---sucrose into glucose and fructose
Absorption: large surface area, villi, and mi -
crovilli, main region of absorption of vitamins, 
minerals, amino acids, glucose, fatty acids and 
glycerol
Large intestine Lining with 
mucous glandspH 6-8
no enzymes1. mucous lubricates faces
2. water absorbed from faces
3. bacteria synthesis vitamin B groups
4. faces mainly water 75%, bacteria, 8%, lipids, 
6%, dietary fiber cellulose, 2% etc
106
Grade 10 Biology Unit 5: Human Biology5.2 The circulatory and lymphatic system
 At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
•	Demonstrate	the	structure	of	the	heart	using	a	heart	model/	
diagram
•	Differentiate	between	pulmonary	and	systemic	circulations.
•	Compare	and	contrast	arteries	and	veins	based	on	their	
structures	and	functions
•	Discuss	types	of	blood
•	Debate	on	the	importance	of	blood	donation	and	its	health	
implications	on	the	donors	and	recipients.
•	Discuss	the	key	functions	and	components	of	the	lymphatic	
system.  Objectives
The circulatory system is a means by which blood moves throughout 
your body. The circulatory system: 
• carries nutrients to cells, 
• remove wastes away from cells,
• carry chemical messages from cells in one part of the body to 
distant target tissues, 
• distributes heat throughout the body and, along with the kidneys, 
• maintain levels of body fluid,
• provide oxygen for the cellular respiration and
• transport of immune cells throughout the body to defend against 
invading organisms 
Moreover, your circulatory system has 96 000 km of blood vessels to 
sustain your 100 trillion cells. Your heart is about the size of your fist 
and with a mass of about 300g. The heart beats about 70 times/min 
from the beginning of your life until death. Every minute, 5L of blood 
cycles from the heart to the lungs, picks up oxygen, and returns to 
the heart. The structure of the heart and the activities of its parts are 
given in the figure ( Figure5.6 ).
In this section, you will explore the remarkable live pump - the heart 
that propels the blood into the vessels. There is no single better word What do you know about 
the movement of blood in 
your body?
Have you ever heard about a live pump?
Activity 5.9 Group work
In groups of 4-6 students, 
prepare diagrams /models 
of the heart and study each 
part with its functions and 
present for the whole-class.
107
Grade 10 Biology Unit 5: Human Biologyto describe the function of the heart other than “pump” since its 
contraction develops the pressure that ejects blood into the major 
vessels: the aorta and pulmonary trunk. From these vessels, the 
blood is distributed to the other parts of the body. A field of study 
about the heart is called cardiology and the scientists, cardiologists. 
                                                                             
  
Figure 5.7 The valves of the heart
The heart is a muscular organ that pumps blood to circulate 
throughout the body. The heart wall consists of three layers: the 
endocardium, myocardium, and epicardium .
The endocardium  is the thin membrane that lines the interior of the 
heart,
The myocardium  is the middle layer of the heart. It is the heart 
muscle and is the thickest layer of the heart, and
The epicardium  is a thin layer on the surface of the heart in which 
the coronary arteries lie.
The pericardium  is a thin sac the heart sits in, often filled with a small 
amount of fluid, which separates the heart from the other structures 
in the chest such as the lungs.
Activity 5.10 Group discussion
In group of 2-3 students:
1. Discuss the 4 chambers of the heart.
2.  Explain the process of movement of blood though the 
chambers.
3. Which chamber is the strongest?
4. Which chamber carries deoxygenated blood?
What are the chambers of 
the heart? 
Figure 5.6 The heart anatomy 
108
Grade 10 Biology Unit 5: Human BiologyWhat types of valves are there between the heart chambers?
Valves
In the cardiovascular system of the heart four valves prohibit the 
backflow of blood:
a.  Tri-cuspid  valve (Right atrioventricular RAV) - valve separates the 
right atria from the right ventricle.
b.  Bi-cuspid  valve (Left atrioventricular LAV) -valve separates 
the left atria from the  left ventricle 
Semi-lunar valves 
a.  Valve that separate the right ventricle from the pulmonary artery   
and 
b.  Valve that separate the left ventricle from  the aorta . The semi-lunar 
valves are half- moon- shaped (hence, the name semi-lunar ), and 
they prevent blood that has entered the arteries from flowing 
back into the ventricles ( Figure 5.6 ).
 The heart consists of two 
(right & left) parallel 
pumps separated by the 
septum (Figure 5.6). The 
four-chambered human 
heart is composed of two 
thin-walled atria (singular: 
atrium) and two thick-
walled ventricles. Blood 
from the systemic system 
enters the right atrium, and 
blood from the pulmonary 
system enters the left atrium. 
The stronger and more 
muscular ventricles pump 
the blood to the lungs and 
distant tissues.Attention
Laboratory Activity 5.11: Dissection of mammalian heart (cow or sheep)
The human heart is a pump. It  pumps  blood around the  body at  different  speeds  and at  
different  pressures according to the  body’s  needs. It  can do this  because  the  wall  of  the  
heart  is  made  from  cardiac  muscle. Cardiac muscles are unlike any other muscle. It never 
gets fatigued like skeletal muscles. On average, cardiac muscle fibres contract and relax about 70 
times a minute. In a lifetime, this muscle will contract over two billion times.   The objective of 
this activity, therefore, is to study the external and internal structure of this amazing mammalian 
heart.
  Procedures:
  1. Collect a freshly slaughtered sheep or cow heart from the butcheries 
  2. Carefully handle and observe:
• the external structures (the outlets and inlets of the pulmonary artery and pulmonary veins)  
• the inlets (superior and inferior vena cava)
• the epicardium
 3. Using a dissecting knife carefully cut open the heart vertically and observe the following 
structures:
• the right and left ventricles
• the septum
• the tricuspid and bicuspid valves and
• the semi-lunar valves
Answer the following questions
1. What do you deduce from your study of the structure of the mammalian heart structure
2.  Now, can you associate what you have studied in the classroom with your practical activity 
in the laboratory?
3.   Write a short report on your activity in the laboratory
109
Grade 10 Biology Unit 5: Human BiologyThe human circulatory systems are a double circulatory system. It 
has two separate circuits and blood passes through the heart twice: 
pulmonary and systemic circulation . 
Pulmonary circulation  - the movement of blood from the heart 
to the lungs for oxygenation, then back to the heart again. Oxygen-
depleted blood from the body leaves the systemic circulation when 
it enters the right atrium through the superior and inferior venae 
cavae . The blood is then pumped through the tricuspid valve into the 
right ventricle. From the right ventricle, blood is pumped through 
the pulmonary valve and into the pulmonary artery. The pulmonary 
artery splits into the right and left pulmonary arteries and the blood in 
the arteries travel to each lung (Figure 5.8).
Systemic circulation  - is the movement of blood from the heart 
through the body to provide oxygen and nutrients to the tissues 
of the body while bringing deoxygenated blood back to the heart. 
Oxygenated blood enters the left atrium from the pulmonary veins 
(Figure 5.8). The blood is then pumped through the mitral valve into 
the left ventricle. From the left ventricle, blood is pumped through 
the aortic valve and into the aorta, the body’s largest artery . The 
aorta arches and branches into major arteries to the upper body 
before passing through the diaphragm, where it branches further 
into the iliac, renal, and suprarenal  arteries which supply the lower 
parts of the body.Activity 5.12 THINK-PAIR-
SHARE
Recall what you have studied 
about the 4 chambers of 
the heart and movement 
of blood. Then, share ideas 
about the movement of 
blood in our body. Finally, 
your teacher will help you 
to classify the two types of 
circulations. Try to support 
your activity using virtual 
lab (circulatory system 
animation, video).
Figure 5.8 Pulmonary and 
systemic circulation   What are the two types of blood circulation?
110
Grade 10 Biology Unit 5: Human BiologyThe arteries branch into smaller arteries, arterioles, and finally 
capillaries . Gas and nutrient exchange with the tissues occurs within 
the capillaries that run through the tissues. Metabolic waste and 
carbon dioxide diffuse out of the cell into the blood, while oxygen 
and glucose in the blood diffuse out of the blood and into the cell. 
Systemic circulation keeps the metabolism of every organ and every 
tissue in the body alive, except the parenchyma of the lungs, which 
are supplied by pulmonary circulation.
 
Cardiac Cycle
The period of time that begins with contraction of the atria and ends 
with ventricular relaxation is known as the cardiac cycle. The period 
of contraction that the heart undergoes while it pumps blood into 
circulation is called systole. The period of relaxation that occurs as 
the chambers filled with blood is called diastole. Both the atria and 
ventricles undergo systole and diastole, and it is essential that these 
components be carefully regulated and coordinated to ensure blood 
is pumped efficiently to the body.Activity 5.13 Pulse rate
Walking or mild exercise will increase your heart rate by 20 to 30%. For those in good health, 
increased energy demands during extreme exercise can raise the heart rate to an incredible 200 
beats per minute. Although few individuals can sustain such a rapid heart rate, it indicates the 
capacity of the heart to adjust to changing situations.
1. While sitting still, place your index and middle finger near your wrist. The pulse you feel is 
blood rushing through the brachial artery in your arm. Count the number of heartbeats in 30 s. 
Record your pulse at rest and then calculate the heart rate as beats per min.
2. Remain sitting quietly and place your index finger and middle finger on the side of your neck 
just to the side of your trachea. You will feel blood pulse through the carotid artery, which is an 
artery that carries blood to the head. Take your pulse for 30 s and then calculate the heart rate 
for 1 min.
3. Run on the spot for approximately 2 min.
4. Take your pulse immediately after exercise using either the carotid artery or the brachial artery.
5. Record your heart rate.
a. Compare the strength of the pulse in the carotid artery with that in your arm.
b. Compare your heart rate before and after exercise.
c.  Do you think the difference between resting heart rate and the heart rate after exercise would 
be greater for athletes? Explain your answer.
111
Grade 10 Biology Unit 5: Human BiologyHeart Sounds
One of the simplest, yet effective, diagnostic techniques applied to 
assess the state of a patient’s heart is auscultation (listening to various 
internal sounds) using a stethoscope. In a normal, healthy heart, 
there are only two audible heart sounds: Lub and Dup (or Dub). 
Lub, or rest heart sound is the sound created by the closing of the 
atrioventricular valves during ventricular contraction. The second 
heart sound, “Dup” (or “Dub”) is the sound of the closing of the 
semilunar valves during ventricular diastole.
The term murmur is used to describe an unusual sound coming from 
the heart that is caused by the turbulent flow of blood. Murmurs are 
graded on a scale of 1 to 6, with 1 being the most common, the most 
difficult sound to detect, and the least serious. The most severe is a 
scale of 6. Specialized electronic stethoscopes are used to record both 
normal and abnormal sounds.
When using a stethoscope to listen to the heart sounds, called 
asculation, it is common practice for the clinician to ask the patient 
to breathe deeply. This procedure not only allows for listening to air 
flow, but it may also amplify heart murmurs. Inhalation increases 
blood flow into the right side of the heart and may increase the 
amplitude of right-sided heart murmurs. Expiration partially restricts 
blood flow into the left side of the heart and may amplify left-sided 
heart murmurs. 
Activity 5.14 Heart sound
Medical workers use stethoscopes to measure blood pressure and to listen 
to the heart, lungs, and intestines. You will use a stethoscope to listen to 
your heart. Disinfect the earpieces of the stethoscope with rubbing al -
cohol before and after use.
i. Place a stethoscope on your own chest and listen for a heart sound. 
Locate the area where the heart sounds are loudest and clearest.
ii. After 1 min of moderate exercise (e.g., walking on the spot), listen 
for your heart sounds again.
a) Draw a diagram of a chest showing where you   located   the clearest 
sound.
b) Did the sound of your heart beat change after exercise? Describe 
what differences you  heard.
Blood Pressure
Blood pressure is the force of the blood on the walls of the 
arteries. It can be measured indirectly with an instrument called a 
112
Grade 10 Biology Unit 5: Human Biologysphygmomanometer. A cuff with an air bladder is wrapped around 
the arm. A small pump is used to inflate the air bladder, thereby closing 
off blood flow through the brachial artery, one of the major arteries 
of the arm. A stethoscope is placed below the cuff and air is slowly 
released from the bladder until a low-pitched sound can be detected. 
The sound is caused by blood entering the previously closed artery.
Each time the heart contracts, the sound are heard. A gauge on the 
sphygmomanometer measures the pressure exerted by the blood 
during ventricular contraction. This pressure is called systolic blood 
pressure. Normal systolic blood pressure is less than 120 mmHg. 
Blood pressure is measured in the non-SI units of millimeters of 
mercury, or mmHg. The cuff is then deflated even more, until the 
sound disappears. At this point, blood flows into the artery during 
ventricular relaxation, or filling. This pressure is called diastolic blood 
pressure. Normal diastolic blood pressure is less than 80 mmHg. A 
systolic pressure of 120 mmHg and a diastolic pressure of 80 mmHg 
would be reported as 120/80 (120 over 80). Reduced filling, such as 
that caused by an internal hemorrhage, will cause diastolic blood 
pressure to fall. 
Blood Vessels
Blood vessels are the channels or conduits through which blood 
is distributed to body tissues. The vessels make up two closed 
systems of tubes that begin and end at the heart. One system, 
the pulmonary vessels, transports blood from the right ventricle to 
the lungs and back to the left atrium. The other system, the systemic 
vessels, carries blood from the left ventricle to the tissues in all parts 
of the body and then returns the blood to the right atrium. Based 
on their structure and function, blood vessels are classified as 
arteries,  capillaries, and veins.
Blood
Blood is a constantly circulating fluid providing the body with 
nutrition, oxygen, and waste removal. Blood is mostly liquid, with 
numerous cells and proteins suspended in it, making blood “thicker” 
than pure water. The average person has about 5 liters of blood. Do you have any idea 
about the lines of 
movement of blood in the 
body?
Activity 5.15 Compare and 
contrast
In a pair, compare and 
contrast arteries, veins and 
capillaries based on their 
structures and functions by 
using diagrams and models, 
and then prepare your own 
summarized notes. 
In small groups, answer the following questions.
• What is blood?
• What components of blood do you know?
• What types of cells are there in blood?
• Why do you think your white blood cells could be higher 
than the normal?
• What are platelets? 
113
Grade 10 Biology Unit 5: Human BiologyLiquid called plasma makes up about half of the content of the 
blood. Plasma contains proteins that help the blood to clot, transport 
substances through the blood, and perform other functions. Blood 
plasma also contains glucose and other dissolved nutrients. About 
half of blood volume is composed of blood cells.
Blood Components
Normally, 7-8% of human body weight comes from blood.  This 
essential fluid carries out the critical functions of transporting 
oxygen and nutrients to our cells and getting rid of carbon dioxide, 
ammonia, and other waste products.  In addition, it plays a vital 
role in our immune system and in maintaining a relatively constant 
body temperature.  Blood is a highly specialized tissue composed of 
more than 4,000 different kinds of components.  Three of the most 
important ones are: 
• Red blood cells, which carry oxygen to the tissues
• White blood cells, which fight infections
• Platelets, smaller cells that help blood clot
• Red blood cells (erythrocytes)
Red blood cells, or erythrocytes, are relatively large microscopic cells 
without nuclei.  Red blood cells normally make up 40-50% of the 
total blood volume.  They transport oxygen from the lungs to all of 
the living tissues of the body and carry away carbon dioxide.  The red 
cells are produced continuously in our bone marrow from stem cells at 
a rate of about 2-3 million cells per second.  Hemoglobin (containing 
iron) is the gas transporting protein molecule that makes up 95% of 
a red cell. People who are anemic generally have a deficiency in red 
cells, and subsequently feel fatigued due to a shortage of oxygen. The 
red colour of blood is primarily due to oxygenated red cells. Human 
fetal hemoglobin molecules differ from those produced by adults in 
the number of amino acid chains. Fetal hemoglobin has three chains, 
while adults produce only two.  As a consequence, fetal hemoglobin 
molecules attract and transport relatively more oxygen to the cells of 
the body.
Red blood cell adaptation for efficient oxygen transportation:
RBC have nucleus at the young stage and lose its nucleus when 
matured. Not having a nucleus  means that there is more space inside 
for hemoglobin, so each red blood cell can carry more oxygen.
Biconcave shape  gives it a larger surface area for gaseous diffusion 
than a flat disc of the same volume.
Very thin cell surface membrane  enables oxygen and carbon dioxide 
can diffuse in and out rapidly.What are adaptations of 
a red blood cell that equip 
it for efficient oxygen 
transport?
114
Grade 10 Biology Unit 5: Human BiologyFlexible cell surface membrane  allows it to squeeze along the 
narrowest blood capillaries.
White blood cells (leukocytes)
White blood cells, or leukocytes, exist in variable numbers and types 
but make up a very small part of blood’s volume; in normally exists 
among only about 1% in healthy people.  Leukocytes are not limited 
to blood.  They occur elsewhere in the body as well, most notably in 
the spleen, liver, and lymph  glands.  Most are produced in our bone 
marrow from the same kind of stem cells that produce red blood 
cells.  Others are produced in the thymus gland, which is at the base 
of the neck.  White blood cells (called lymphocytes) are:
the first responders to our immune system.  They seek out, 
identify, and bind to alien proteins on bacteria,  viruses, 
and fungi so that they can be removed.  Other white blood cells 
(called granulocytes and macrophages) then arrive to surround and 
destroy the alien cells. 
have the function of getting rid of dead or dying blood cells as well 
as foreign matter.
Individual white blood cells usually only last for 18-36 hours before 
they are removed, though some types live as much as a year.  There 
are several different kinds of white blood cells (Table 5.3). The two 
important types are:
neutrophils  white blood cells that have a lobed nucleus, and
lymphocytes  white blood cells that are smaller than neutrophils and 
which have a large nucleus that takes up most of the cell.  
Platelets or thrombocytes  that are tiny cell fragments  without 
nuclei  enclosed in a membrane. Platelets play an essential role in 
blood clotting. Clotting has two important functions:
• it helps to stop blood from flowing out of the damaged vessel, and 
• it prevents disease-causing pathogenic microorganisms (viruses, 
bacteria) from getting into the body.
• they collect where a damaged blood vessel is leaking blood and 
form a temporary plug by combining with fibers of collagen, a 
protein of the blood vessel wall.
• they release an enzyme that sets off a chain of chemical reactions 
in the blood. The result of these reactions is to change fibrinogen , 
a soluble plasma protein into a network of insoluble fibrin 
threads . These networks of fibrin threads, then plug in the cut 
and clot the blood.What are platelets?
115
Grade 10 Biology Unit 5: Human BiologyTable 5.3 Red blood cells, white blood cells and platelets
Plasma
Plasma is a yellow-tinted water, sugar, fat, protein, and salt fluid that 
transports red blood cells, white blood cells, and platelets.
Plasma makes up 55 percent of our blood volume.
• provides nutrients to cells while also removing metabolic waste.
• blood clotting factors, carbohydrates, lipids, vitamins, minerals, 
hormones, enzymes, antibodies, and other proteins are all found 
in it.
• includes some of every protein generated by the body; so far, only 
about 500 proteins have been discovered in human plasma.
Blood groups
The blood grouping depends on which antigens are on the surface 
of the red blood cells. Antigens are molecules. They can be either 
proteins or sugars. The types and features of antigens can vary 
between individuals due to small genetic differences. The antigens in 
blood have various functions, including:
• transporting other molecules into and out of the cell,
• maintaining the structure of red blood cells, andCell types Number Life span Functions
Erythrocytes(red blood cells)
5-6million 120 daysTransport oxygen and 
help transport carbon -
dioxide
Leukocytes(White blood cells)
5000-1000018-36 hours, some 
can survive as long as 
a yearDefense and immunity
Platelets
250000-400,000
9-10 days Blood clotting
  What is plasma?
Activity 5.16 Answer to the 
questions
1.  Have you ever heard 
about A, B, AB & O 
blood groups? 
2.  If yes, do you know 
what your blood group 
is? 
3.  What are the bases for 
blood grouping?
116
Grade 10 Biology Unit 5: Human Biology• detecting unwanted cells that could cause illness.
Scientists use two types of antigens to classify blood types:
• ABO antigens and
• Rh antigens.
Antigens and antibodies play a role in the immune system’s defence 
mechanism. White blood cells produce antibodies. These antibodies 
will target an antigen if they consider it a foreign object. This is why it 
is essential to match blood types when a person needs a transfusion. 
If a person receives red blood cells with antigens that are not already 
present in their system, their body will reject and attack the new red 
blood cells. This can cause a severe and possibly life-threatening 
reaction.
The ABO blood group system classifies blood types according to the 
different types of antigens in the red blood cells and antibodies in the 
plasma. They use the ABO system alongside the Rh antigen status to 
determine which blood type or types will match for a safe red blood 
cell transfusion.
There are four ABO groups:
Group A : The surface of the red blood cells contains A antigen, and 
the plasma has anti-B antibody. Anti-B antibodies would attack blood 
cells that contain B antigens.
Group B : The surface of the red blood cells contains B antigen, and 
the plasma has anti-A antibody. Anti-A antibody would attack blood 
cells that contain A antigen.
Group AB : The red blood cells have both A and B antigens, but the 
plasma does not contain anti-A or anti-B antibodies. Individuals with 
type AB can receive any ABO blood type.
Group O : The plasma contains both anti-A and anti-B antibodies, 
but the surface of the red blood cells does not contain A or B antigens. 
Since these antigens are not present, a person with any ABO blood 
type can receive this type of blood.
Rhesus factor
During the 1940s scientists discovered another antigen on the red 
blood cell, the Rhesus factor . Like the ABO blood groups, the Rhesus Do you have any idea about the relationship between biology 
and other sciences?
117
Grade 10 Biology Unit 5: Human Biologyfactor is inherited. Individuals who have this antigen are said to be 
Rhesus positive (Rh+). Approximately 85 % of the populations have 
the antigen. The remaining 15% of individuals who do not have the 
antigen are said to be Rhesus negative (Rh–). Individuals who are 
Rh– may donate blood to Rh+ individuals, but should not receive Rh+ 
blood. The human body has no natural antibodies against Rh factors, 
but antibodies can be produced following a transfusion. Although 
Rh antibodies are produced in response to antigens, it should be 
pointed out that the immune reaction is subdued compared with 
that of the ABO group.
Rhesus-factor incompatibilities become important for Rh+ babies of 
Rh– mothers. If the baby inherits the Rh+ factor from the father, a 
condition called erythroblastosis fetalis ( a	medical	 condition	 where 	
an	Rh	negative	 mother’s	 antibodies	 attack	 the	red	blood	 cells	 of	an	
Rh	positive	 fetus)	 can occur with these condition and subsequent 
pregnancies. The first child is spared because the blood of the mother 
and baby are separated by the placenta (a membrane inside the uterus 
that exchanges materials between mother and baby). During birth, 
the placenta is shed from the uterus. Capillary beds rupture, and, for 
the first time, the blood of the baby comes into contact with the blood 
of the mother. 
The mother’s immune system recognizes the Rh+ antigens and 
triggers the production of antibodies. But, by the time the antibodies 
are produced, the first baby is no longer connected to the placenta and 
has escaped the potentially dangerous situation. However, a second 
pregnancy presents problems if the fetus is Rh+. The mother retains 
many of the antibodies from her first encounter with Rh+ blood. If 
antibodies cross the placenta, they attach to the antigen on the red 
blood cells of the fetus, causing them to be destroyed. Symptoms 
when	 an	Rh	negative	 mother’s	 antibodies	 attack	 the	red	blood	 cells	 of	
an	Rh	positive	 fetus include anemia, jaundice, and an enlarged liver .How does Rh+ blood differ from Rh– blood and what happens if 
the Rh factor of the blood transfused is incompatible?
Why does a fetus with erythroblastosis fetalis develop anemia?
118
Grade 10 Biology Unit 5: Human Biology5.2.1 Blood Donation 
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
•	Discuss	the	reason	for	blood	donation,
•	Outline	the	conditions	for	blood	transfusion, 	and
•	Discuss	blood	type	and	Rh	factor	compatibility.Objectives
Blood is a very vital component of the human body. In case of an 
injury, severe sickness, or during operations, loss of a large quantity 
of blood may result in death. In such cases, blood from a healthy 
person called the donor is given to the sick or a person that lost 
blood under some other unexpected condition. The sick person who 
receives blood is called the recipient. The process of transferring 
blood from a healthy person (donor) to a person deficient in blood 
(recipient) is called blood transfusion. Great care has to be taken by 
the doctors while transfusing blood from the donor to the recipient.
Blood group compatibility
If the blood from two different blood groups is mixed and if it is 
not compatible, there may be a reaction between the antigen and 
the complementary antibody which makes the red blood cells stick 
together, a phenomenon known as agglutination . The agglutins 
block the capillaries and even larger blood vessels. But if someone 
loses a lot of blood in an accident, an injury, during giving birth or 
an operation, then they may need a blood transfusion. This is when 
blood taken from one person is given to another to save their life. 
Before a transfusion it is vital to know the blood groups of both the 
person giving the blood (the donor) and the person receiving the 
blood (the recipient). 
This means the right type of blood can be given to prevent 
agglutination. The blood groups must be compatible. It is not 
usually the case that only one type of blood can be given, simply 
that blood containing a particular antigen must not be mixed with 
blood containing the matching antibody (summarized in table 5.4). 
For example, blood group O has no antigens so it can be given to 
anyone, but someone who has blood group O has both antibodies 
so they can only receive group O blood. On the other hand someone 
with blood group AB which has no antibodies can receive any type 
of blood. Figure 5.9 summarizes the compatibilities of the different 
blood groups.Activity 1.5: THINK-PAIR-
SHARE
In a group of 4-5 students, 
go to the nearby blood 
bank, hospital, health 
centers or posts,  and 
gather information on 
the importance of blood 
donation and its health 
implication (if any) on the 
donor and/or the recipients. 
Finally, report your findings 
to the classroom discussion. 
119
Grade 10 Biology Unit 5: Human BiologyTable 5.4 Antigens and antibodies
Blood group Antigen on red blood 
cellsAntibody in plasma
A A B
B B A
AB AB None
O None AB
The O blood groups is termed “Universal Donor” while the AB blood 
group is termed as a “Universal recipient”
Key: x-shows coagulation
Figure 5.9 Blood compatibility chart
The Lymphatic System
A little amount of protein spills from capillaries into tissue voids on 
a regular basis. Even if the leak is modest, the buildup of proteins in 
the extracellular fluid (ECF) would be a significant problem; osmotic 
pressure would drop and tissues would enlarge.
The proteins are emptied from the ECF and return to the circulatory 
system via the lymphatic system , a collection of vessels (Figure 5.10). 
Lymph, a fluid similar to blood plasma, is transported through lymph 
vessels that are open-ended like veins. This low-pressure return 
system is driven by slow muscle contractions against the arteries, 
which are equipped with flap-like valves to prevent fluid backflow. 
Through the right and left subclavian veins, the lymphatic system 
returns lymph to the venous system.Form group of 2-3 
students and do a 
library search about the 
lymphatic system and 
present your findings to 
the class. 
What is the lymphatic 
system?
120
Grade 10 Biology Unit 5: Human Biology 
Figure 5.10 The lymphatic system
Lymph nodes are enlargements that appear in the lymph channel at 
regular intervals (Figure 5.10). These contain white blood cells that, 
through the process of phagocytosis, filter out any bacteria present. 
Lymph nodes store lymphocytes in addition to screening damaged 
cells and debris from the lymph. The lymph nodes in your neck can 
expand when you have a sore throat.
The key functions of the lymphatic system:
• returns excess interstitial fluid  to the blood
• the absorption  of fats and fat- soluble  vitamins  from the digestive 
system  and the subsequent transport of these substances to the 
venous circulation. The blood capillaries absorb most nutrients, 
but the fats and fat-soluble vitamins are absorbed by the lacteals. 
The lymph in the lacteals has a milky appearance due to its high 
fat content and is called  chyle.
• defence against invading microorganisms and disease. Lymph 
nodes and other lymphatic organs filter the lymph to remove 
microorganisms and other foreign particles. Lymphatic organs 
contain lymphocytes  that destroy invading organisms.
Components of the Lymphatic System
The lymphatic system consists of a fluid (lymph), vessels that 
transport the lymph and organs that contain lymphoid tissue.Activity 5.18 Outline the 
relationship
Based on your studies above 
and using internet and books 
a source of information, 
outline the relationship 
between the lymphatic and 
the immune systems. 
  What are the functions of the lymphatic system?
Which components of the 
lymphatic system do you 
know?
Right lymphatic 
duct, entering right 
subclavianvein vein
121
Grade 10 Biology Unit 5: Human BiologyLymph
Lymph is a fluid substance made up of lymphocytes and white blood 
cells that is clear to white in colour. Lymph is a component of the 
lymphatic system that is present in lymphatic veins and other cavities 
throughout the body. It transports white blood cells within lymph 
nodes and bones, removes interstitial fluid from organs, and fights 
disease-causing and infectious bacteria invading blood cells. Lymph 
serves a variety of purposes:
• Removes metabolic wastes from tissue cells,
• Provides the body with nutrition, 
• Aids in the invasion of microbe-caused pathogenic diseases,
• Through lymphatic vessels, absorbs fat-soluble vitamins and 
other digested fat molecules from the small intestine, and
• Maintain the composition of tissue fluid. 
Lymphatic vessels
Unlike blood vessels, lymphatic vessels transport only fluid away 
from tissues (Figure 5.11). The lymph capillaries are the smallest 
lymphatic vessels, beginning in the tissue spaces as blind-ended sacs. 
Lymph capillaries can be found in every part of the body except 
the bone marrow, the central nervous system, and tissues that lack 
blood vessels, such as the epidermis. The wall of the lymph capillary 
is made up of endothelium, which is made up of simple squamous 
cells that overlap to form a simple one-way valve. This configuration 
allows fluid to enter the capillary but prevents lymph from exiting 
the vessel.
Figure 5.11 Lymphatic vessels
Lymphatic vessels are formed when microscopic lymph capillaries are 
connected. Small lymphatic vessels connect to form larger tributaries 
known as lymphatic trunks, which drain large areas. The lymphatic 
trunks join together until lymph enters the two lymphatic ducts. The 
right lymphatic duct drains lymph from the upper right quadrant of 
the body. The thoracic duct drains the remainder.
122
Grade 10 Biology Unit 5: Human BiologyLymphatic tributaries, like veins, have thin walls and valves to 
prevent blood backflow. The lymphatic system lacks a pump like 
in cardiovascular system. The pressure gradients that move lymph 
through the vessels are caused by skeletal muscle action, respiratory 
movement, and smooth muscle contraction in vessel walls.
Organs of the lymphatic system
Clusters of lymphocytes and other cells, such as macrophages, are 
enmeshed in a framework of short, branching tissue fibres that 
distinguish lymphatic organs. Lymphocytes are formed alongside 
other types of blood cells in the red bone marrow and are transported 
in the blood from the bone marrow to the lymphatic organs. 
When the body is exposed to microorganisms and other foreign 
substances, lymphocytes proliferate within the lymphatic organs 
and are transported to the site of the invasion via the blood. This 
is a component of the immune response that seeks to eliminate the 
invading agent. Among the lymphatic organs are:
• Lymph nodes
• Tonsils
• Spleen, and
• Thymus.
i. Lymph nodes
Lymph fluid flows in the lymph nodes throughout the body before 
finally making its way back to the blood stream. While doing so, 
it collects and traps harmful matter, such as bacteria, viruses, and 
bodily waste products. The lymph nodes filter the fluid and release it 
back into the bloodstream. Lymph nodes also contain immune cells 
that help fight infection by attacking the germs that the body’s lymph 
fluid has collected. The lymph nodes may swell when a person has a 
temporary infection. The swelling occurs as a result of immune cell 
activity in the lymph nodes. The location of the swelling often relates 
to the affected area. For example, an ear injury/infection may cause 
swollen lymph nodes near the ear, while someone with an upper 
respiratory tract infection may notice swollen lymph nodes in their 
neck.
ii. Tonsils
 Tonsils are lymphatic tissue clusters located just beneath the mucous 
membranes that line the nose, mouth, and throat (pharynx) (Figure 
5.12). The tonsils’ lymphocytes and macrophages protect us from 
harmful substances and pathogens such as bacteria and viruses that 
enter the body through the nose or mouth.Why the lymphatic 
system is an open system?
Which types of lymphatic 
organs do you know?
Have you ever 
encountered injury 
on your hands, legs or 
somewhere on your limbs 
and felt tenderness, pain, 
and uncomfortable at 
your groin area and 
armpits? What do you 
think is the reason?
Figure 5.12 Locations of 
Tonsils Where in your body is located spleen and what is its function?You may have 
experienced tonsillitis 
in your early child hood 
with red swollen tonsils. 
Do you know why the 
tonsils are swollen? What 
are the causative agents 
for this ?
123
Grade 10 Biology Unit 5: Human BiologySpleen
The spleen is found in the upper left abdominal cavity, just below the 
diaphragm and posterior to the stomach (Figure 5.10). Its shape and 
structure are similar to that of a lymph node, but it is much larger. 
The spleen performs the following functions: 
•  filters blood in the same way that lymph nodes filter lymph; 
• lymphocytes in the spleen react to pathogens in the blood and 
attempt to destroy them; 
• macrophages engulf debris, damaged cells, and other large 
particles; 
• removes old and damaged erythrocytes from the circulating 
blood; and 
• it produces lymphocytes, particularly in response to infection.
Thymus
The thymus is a soft organ with two lobes anterior to the ascending 
aorta and posterior to the sternum (Figure 5.10). It is relatively 
large in infants and children, but after puberty, it begins to shrink 
in size until it is quite small in older adults. The thymus’ primary 
function is to process and mature special lymphocytes known as 
T-lymphocytes or T-cells. Pathogens and foreign agents are not 
recognized by lymphocytes while they are in the thymus. After 
maturing, lymphocytes enter the bloodstream and travel to other 
lymphatic organs, where they aid in disease defense. Thymosin, 
a hormone produced by the thymus, stimulates the maturation of 
lymphocytes in other lymphatic organs.
5.2.2. Diseases of the circulatory and lymphatic systems 
 At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
•	Discuss	the	diseases	of	the	circulatory	and	lymphatic	
systems	(leukemia, 	varicose	vein, 	elephantiasis, 	
cardiovascular	diseases).	 Objectives
Leukemia
Leukemia is a type of cancer that affects blood-forming tissues, 
including bone marrow (Figure 5.13). There are several types of 
leukemia, including acute lymphoblastic leukemia, acute myeloid 
leukemia, and chronic lymphocytic leukemia. For example, many 
patients with slow-growing leukemia are asymptomatic, and rapidly 
progressing types of leukemia can cause fatigue, weight loss, frequent 
infections, and easy bleeding or bruising. Also, the treatment 
varies greatly. Treatment for slow-growing leukemia may include Activity 5.19 THINK-PAIR-
SHARE
Nowadays, with the 
modernization of human 
life style, feeding habits and 
environmental pollution, 
people all over the world 
are suffering from severe 
cardiovascular diseases of 
different types. Being in 
groups of 2-3 students, write 
down the types of circulatory 
and lymphatic system 
diseases and discuss causes 
and symptoms of such 
diseases. Finally, report your 
finding to your classmates. 
Some of them are described 
below.
124
Grade 10 Biology Unit 5: Human Biologymonitoring. Chemotherapy, sometimes followed by radiation and 
stem-cell transplant, is used to treat aggressive leukemia.
Figure 5.13 Leukemia
Varicose veins 
Varicose veins are enlarged, swollen, and twisting veins that often 
have blue or dark purple colour ( Figure 5.14) . They occur when 
faulty vein valves allow blood to flow in the wrong direction or pool. 
Varicose veins are thought to affect more than 23% of all adults. It is 
common in:
• pregnant women are more prone to varicose veins, and 
• overweight people are more prone to varicose veins 
Aching legs, swollen ankles, and spider veins  are some of the 
symptoms. It occurs when the valves in the veins fail to function 
properly, allowing blood to flow inefficiently. Treatment for varicose 
veins is rarely necessary for health reasons; however, if swelling, 
aching, and painful legs occur, and there is significant discomfort, 
treatment is available. There are several options, including some 
home remedies. In severe cases, a varicose vein may rupture or 
develop into varicose ulcers on the skin.
Figure 5.14 Figure A,  shows a 
normal vein with a properly 
working valve. In Figure B, the 
varicose vein has a faulty valve; 
the walls of the vein are thin and 
stretched  
125
Grade 10 Biology Unit 5: Human BiologyElephantiasis
Elephantiasis is a condition that causes a large enlargement of a part 
of the body, usually the limbs (Figure 5.15). External genitals are 
another area that is frequently affected. Elephantiasis is caused by a 
blockage in the lymphatic system, resulting in an accumulation of a 
fluid known as lymph in the affected areas. Elephantiasis is caused 
by parasitic worms transmitted by mosquitoes. Wuchereria	 bancrofti , 
Brugia	malayi , and Brugia	timori  are the three worms involved.
            
Figure 5.15 Elephantiasis
Worms have an impact on the body’s lymphatic system. The 
lymphatic system is in charge of eliminating waste and toxins. If it 
becomes clogged, it is unable to properly remove waste. This causes 
a buildup of lymphatic fluid, resulting in swelling.
Cardiovascular diseases
Cardiovascular diseases are classified into several types. Among 
them are: 
• Abnormal heart rhythms, also known as arrhythmias;
• Aorta disease and Marfan syndrome are two examples,
• Congenital heart disease is a condition that occurs at birth,
• Coronary artery disease is a condition that affects the arteries in 
the heart (narrowing of the arteries),
• Deep vein thrombosis (DVT) and pulmonary embolism (PE), 
• A heart attack,
• Heart failure, and
• Muscle disease of the heart (cardiomyopathy).
Activity 5.20 Reflection
Based on your studies in the 
previous lessons, reflect on 
diseases of the circulatory 
and lymphatic system, and 
explain why some people are 
easily susceptible to infection 
while others are resistant to 
many infections. Use virtual 
lab (animation and video) to 
reflect.
What are cardiovascular 
diseases?
Have you heard about any type of heart disease? If yes, mention 
and share your classmates.
126
Grade 10 Biology Unit 5: Human BiologyHeart disease
Heart and blood vessel disease (also known as heart disease) 
encompasses a wide range of issues, many of which are linked to a 
process known as atherosclerosis. Atherosclerosis is a condition that 
occurs when a substance called plaque accumulates in the artery 
walls. This buildup narrows the arteries, making blood flow more 
difficult. When a blood clot forms, it can obstruct blood flow. This 
can result in a heart attack or a stroke.
Heart attack
A heart attack occurs when a blood clot blocks blood flow to a 
portion of the heart. If the clot completely obstructs blood flow, the 
part of the heart muscle supplied by that artery begins to die. Most 
people recover from their first heart attack and go on to live normal 
lives, gaining many more years of productive activity. However, 
having a heart attack means that you must make some changes. The 
medications and lifestyle changes recommended by your doctor may 
differ depending on how badly your heart was damaged and the 
degree of heart disease that caused the heart attack.
Stroke
Stroke is a cerebrovascular disease. It occurs when a blockage or 
bleed of the blood vessels either interrupts or reduces the supply of 
blood to the brain. When this happens, the brain does not receive 
enough oxygen or nutrients, and brain cells start to die. 
There are 2 types of stroke:
1. An ischemic stroke (the most common type of stroke) occurs 
when a blood vessel that supplies the brain becomes blocked, 
typically due to a blood clot. When a part of the brain’s blood 
supply is cut off, some brain cells begin to die. This can lead to 
the loss of functions controlled by that part of the brain, such as 
walking or speaking.
2. When a blood vessel in the brain bursts, it causes a hemorrhagic 
stroke. Uncontrolled hypertension is the most common cause of 
this (high blood pressure). Some stroke effects are permanent if 
too many brain cells die as a result of oxygen deprivation. This 
population of cells is never replenished.
The good news is that brain cells do not always die during a stroke; 
instead, the damage is only temporary. As injured cells repair 
themselves, previously impaired function improves over time. In What is the reason for stroke? 
127
Grade 10 Biology Unit 5: Human Biologyother cases, nearby undamaged brain cells may take over for the 
injured areas of the brain. In any case, strength may return, speech 
may improve, and memory may improve.
Heart failure
Heart failure, also known as congestive heart failure, occurs when 
the heart does not pump blood as efficiently as it should. Heart 
failure does not imply that the heart ceases to beat; this is a common 
misconception. Instead, the heart continues to beat, but the body’s 
need for blood and oxygen is unsatisfied. If left untreated, heart 
failure can worsen. It is critical to follow the doctor’s orders if your 
loved one has heart failure.
Arrhythmia
An abnormal heart rhythm is referred to as arrhythmia . Arrhythmias 
come in a variety of forms. The heart can beat too slowly, too quickly, 
or in an irregular pattern. Bradycardia or a slow heart rate, occurs 
when the heart rate is less than 60 beats per minute. Tachycardia, or 
an abnormally fast heart rate, is defined as a heart rate of more than 
100 beats per minute. An arrhythmia can impair the function of your 
heart. Your heart may not be able to pump enough blood to meet 
your body’s needs if it has an irregular heartbeat.
5.3 The breathing system
You can’t go more than 3 minutes without breathing, and even if 
you tried, your autonomic nervous system would take over. This 
is because every cell in the body needs to run the oxidative stages 
of cellular respiration, the process by which energy is produced 
in the form of adenosine triphosphate (ATP). Oxygen is used as a 
reactant, and carbon dioxide is released as a waste product, in order 
for oxidative phosphorylation to take place. Although cells require 
oxygen, your need to breathe is primarily driven by the accumulation 
of carbon dioxide.
The respiratory system, which includes muscles to move air into 
and out of the lungs, passageways through which air moves, and 
microscopic gas exchange surfaces covered by capillaries, allows Activity 5.21 Group work
Here in this section 
are mentioned some 
cardiovascular and 
lymphatic system diseases. 
Yet there are too much of 
them to mention. Therefore, 
in groups of 3-4 students 
and reading books and 
browsing internet resources, 
list cardiovascular and 
lymphatic system diseases as 
much as you can and discuss 
among your classmates. Two 
of them are given below.
1.  Endocarditis?
2.  Rheumatic fever?  
 At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
•	Draw	and	label	the	human	breathing	systems,
•	Show	the	link	between	the	human	breathing	system	and	the	
circulatory	system, 	and
•	Demonstrate	the	mechanism	of	breathing	using	locally	
available	materials ObjectivesHold your breath and 
see how long you can 
hold your breath as 
you continue reading. 
How long can you do 
it? May be you are 
feeling uncomfortable 
already. Why do you feel 
uncomfortable? Then, 
individually, write down 
the reasons why this 
happens. Share your list 
and discuss in groups on 
your reasons.
128
Grade 10 Biology Unit 5: Human Biologycarbon dioxide to be exhaled and oxygen to be inhaled. Gases are 
transported from the lungs to tissues throughout the body via the 
circulatory system. If your breathing is disrupted by a variety of 
conditions, such as what you did in your activity above, or diseases 
of the respiratory system, such as asthma, emphysema, chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disorder (COPD), and lung cancer, you will 
experience difficulties in the normal functioning of your breathing 
system, which can be quite severe at times. 
The breathing system organs’ primary functions are to: 
• provide oxygen to body tissues for cellular respiration, 
• remove the waste product, carbon dioxide, 
• help to maintain acid-base balance, and 
• portions of the breathing system are also used for non-vital 
functions such as sensing odors, producing speech, and coughing.
The nose, larynx, pharynx, trachea, bronchi, bronchios, and alveoli 
are the major structures of the breathing system. The following 
sections go over these structures and their functions one by one.
Figure 5.16. The human breathing systemActivity 5.22 Individual 
work
Students, you will be 
provided with prepared 
diagram/model of the 
human breathing systems. 
Observing your diagram/
model draw, label and study 
the breathing system. During 
your activity use virtual 
lab (simulation software, 
animation and video). 
Then, answer the following 
question given below.What is the primary function of the breathing system in human 
body?
129
Grade 10 Biology Unit 5: Human BiologyIn humans, air enters the breathing system through the two nasal 
cavities or the mouth (Figure 5.18). The tiny hairs that line the nasal 
cavities act as a filter, keeping foreign particles out of the lower 
breathing tract. The nasal cavity contains mucus, which warms and 
moistens the incoming air, traps foreign particles and keeps the cells 
that line the cavity moist. 
Major breathing structures and their functions
The Nose
The nostrils are the main entry and exit points of breathing system, 
which are located in the nose. The nasal cavity, which is divided 
into left and right sections by the nasal septum, receives the inhaled 
air. The air moves from the nasal cavities to the pharynx. Mucous 
membranes line portions of the nasal cavities, which contain 
sebaceous glands and hair follicles that prevent large debris, such as 
dirt, from passing through the nasal cavity.
Goblet cells, a type of specialized columnar epithelial cell that 
produces mucus to trap debris, are found in the nasal epithelium. 
With a constant beating motion, the cilia of the breathing epithelium 
help remove mucus and debris from the nasal cavity, sweeping 
materials towards the throat to be swallowed. Cold air, on the other 
hand, slows the movement of the cilia, resulting in the accumulation 
of mucus, which can lead to a runny nose in the winter. This moist 
epithelium warms and humidifies the incoming air. The incoming air 
is warmed by capillaries just beneath the nasal epithelium. Because 
the thick mucus produced to defend you from pathogens blocks the 
surface of the receptors on the nasal epithelium, you lose your ability 
to smell during a common cold or influenza.
Pharynx
The pharynx is a tube made up of skeletal muscle and mucous 
membrane that runs parallel to the nasal cavities. The pharynx, also 
known as the throat , is a tube that runs from the base of the skull to 
the sixth cervical vertebra. It receives air from the nasal cavity and 
air, food, and water from the oral cavity, serving the breathing and 
digestive systems. It opens into the larynx and esophagus from the 
back.
Only air can pass through the upper part of the pharynx (throat). 
Air, food, and fluids can pass through the lower parts. The pharynx 
Activity 5.23 Individual 
work
When you are sick of 
common cold or influenza, 
you may lose your smelling 
sense for some time and 
regain it back when you get 
better of the common cold.
1.  Explain this 
phenomenon
2. What is the reason for the 
loss of you sense of smell?
Figure 5.17. The pharynxWhy nasal cavity is considered as a good air conditioner?
130
Grade 10 Biology Unit 5: Human Biologycontains the pharyngeal, palatine, and lingual tonsils. Sometimes the 
pharynx can be infected by microorganisms. The pharyngeal tonsil 
has a large number of lymphocytes (a type of white blood cell) and 
is covered with ciliated epithelium that traps and destroys pathogens 
that enter through inhalation.
Larynx
The larynx is a structure that connects the pharynx to the trachea 
and helps regulate the amount of air that enters and leaves the lungs 
(Figure 5.18). Several pieces of cartilage make up the structure of 
larynx.
Figure 5.18. The larynx extends to the trachea.
The epiglottis is a thin, elastic cartilage that covers the trachea’s 
opening and is attached to the thyroid cartilage. When the epiglottis 
is closed, the unattached end of it rests on the glottis. The glottis is 
made up of the vestibular folds, true vocal cords, and space between 
them (Figure 5.19).
The inner borders of the real vocal cords (Figure 5.19) are free, 
allowing oscillation to make sound. The size of true vocal cord 
membranous folds varies from person to person, resulting in voices 
with various pitch ranges. Males have greater folds than females, 
which gives them a deeper voice.
During swallowing, the pharynx and larynx lift upward, allowing the 
pharynx to expand and the laryngeal epiglottis to swing downward, 
Do you know how sound is formed in the voice box?
What happens if pieces of food or fluid you swallow-in wrongly 
entered into your trachea?  Which structure of your laryngeal 
area prevents you from such drop-ins?
131
Grade 10 Biology Unit 5: Human Biologyclosing the trachea opening. Because of these movements, food and 
liquids cannot enter the trachea, which creates a bigger region for 
food to travel through.
   
                  
Figure 5.19  The vocal cords 
Trachea
The trachea (windpipe) extends from the larynx toward the lungs 
(Figure 5.20). The trachea is formed by 16 to 20 stacked pieces 
of cartilage that are connected by connective tissue. The elastic 
membrane of the trachea allows it to stretch and expand slightly 
during inhalation and exhalation, whereas the rings of cartilage 
provide structural support and prevent the trachea from collapsing.
 
Figure 5.20 The trachea 
132
Grade 10 Biology Unit 5: Human BiologyBronchi and Bronchioles
The right and left primary bronchi  branch of the trachea towards 
the right and left lungs. The primary bronchi further branch into 
the secondary and tertiary bronchi. A bronchiole branches from the 
tertiary bronchi. Bronchioles, which are about 1 mm in diameter, 
further branch until they become the tiny terminal bronchioles, 
which lead to the structures of gas exchange . There are more than 
1000 terminal bronchioles in each lung. The muscular walls of 
the bronchioles do not contain cartilage-like those of the bronchi. 
However, smooth muscle can change the size of the tubing to increase 
or decrease airflow through it.
 
Breathing Gas Exchange
Structures involved directly in gas exchange are found in the breathing 
zone. The breathing zone begins when the terminal bronchioles join 
a breathing bronchiole (Figure 5.21), the smallest type of bronchiole 
which leads to an alveolar duct and opens into a cluster of alveoli.
Figure 5.21 Bronchioles (a) lead to alveolar sacs (b) in the breathing zone, 
where gas exchange occurs.
Alveoli
An alveolar sac is a cluster of many individual alveoli that are 
responsible for gas exchange. An alveolus with elastic walls, stretch 
during air intake which greatly increases the surface area available Activity 5.24 Group work
Before you move to the next topic, in groups of 2-3 students, iden -
tify the interplay between the circulatory and the breathing sys -
tems. How is the breathing system interrelated to the circulatory 
system? Explain.
Where in the breathing 
system does the actual 
gas exchange take place?
A B
133
Grade 10 Biology Unit 5: Human Biologyfor gas exchange. Alveoli are connected to their neighbors by alveolar 
pores, which help maintain equal air pressure throughout the alveoli 
and lung (Figure 5.21).
In the following table is shown the composition of atmospheric and 
exhaled air.
Table 5.5 Comparison of atmospheric and exhaled air
Component Atmospheric air Exhaled air
oxygen 21% 16%
Nitrogen 78% 78%
Carbon dioxide 0.04% 4%
Temperature 37 degree centigrade variable
Moisture saturated variable
Breathing Movements
Pressure differences between the atmosphere and the chest, or 
thoracic cavity determine the movement of air into and out of the 
lungs. Atmospheric pressure remains relatively constant, but the 
pressure in the chest cavity may vary. An understanding of breathing 
hinges on an understanding of gas pressures. The mechanism of 
breathing is shown in Figure 5.22.
Gases move from an area of high pressure to an area of low pressure:
• Inspiration occurs when the pressure inside the lungs is less than 
that of the atmosphere , and
• expiration occurs when the pressure inside the lungs is greater 
than that of the atmosphere.
• 
            
Figure 5.22 Breathing movements: a) Inspiration    b) Expiration
The diaphragm , a dome-shaped sheet of muscle that separates the 
thoracic, or chest cavity from the abdominal cavity, can regulate the 
pressure in the chest cavity. 
Activity 5.25 Individual 
work
Now individually, do the 
following: (the teacher will 
help you in this activity)
1. Put your pointing figure 
in between two of your 
ribs.
2. Inhale air to the 
maximum. What happens 
with your ribs?
3. Now, exhale the volume 
of air you inhaled. What 
happens to your ribs?
4. What happens with 
your chest cavity as you 
inhales and exhale air 
from your lungs?
A B
134
Grade 10 Biology Unit 5: Human BiologyDuring inspiration, the diaphragm muscle contracts, or shortens, 
pulling downward. The chest volume increases and pressure in the 
lungs decreases. The atmospheric pressure is now greater than the 
pressure in the chest cavity, and air moves into the lungs.
During expiration, the diaphragm relaxes and returns to its dome 
shape due to the force exerted by the organs in the abdomen. The 
chest volume decreases and pressure increases. The pressure in the 
chest cavity is now greater than the atmospheric pressure, and air 
moves out of the lungs (Figure 5.22).
Changes in chest volume during inspiration and expiration:
A.  The intercostals muscles contract and the rib cage pull upward. 
Because the pressure in the chest cavity is lower than the 
atmospheric pressure, air moves into the lungs.
B.  The intercostals muscles relax and the rib cage falls. Because the 
pressure in the chest cavity is higher than the atmospheric pressure, 
air moves out of the lungs.
Activity 5.26  Observing the mechanism of breathing 
In order to observe the breathing movement of your lungs, prepare a lung 
model from locally available materials as indicated in the left hand corner. 
Materials you may need for this activity: 1. A bell jar 2. Plastic tubing (like 
juice straw) 3. Threads  4. The stopper and rubber tubing  
Finally, produce the model and observe how your lungs move during 
inhalation and exhalation.
The respiratory and circulatory systems work together to provide ox -
ygen to the body and remove carbon dioxide from the body. While the 
former deals with air and the latter with blood, they work together to 
coordinate the operations of each system’s components. Other body 
systems, such as the digestive and neurological systems, are crucial 
as well, but the circulatory and respiratory systems must work contin -
ually even without a few minutes of rest.
The circulatory and respiratory systems take oxygen from the air and 
transport it throughout the body while the digestive and respiratory 
systems take carbon dioxide from the body and release it into the at -
mosphere. The lungs expand and fill with fresh air as a person inhales. 
The respiratory system works in collaboration with the circulatory 
system to transport oxygen from fresh air to red blood cells in the 
arteries of the lungs, as well as to release carbon dioxide from the 
blood into the lungs’ air. This used air leaves the body when a person 
How a blood circulatory 
system does interact with 
the respiratory system? 
135
Grade 10 Biology Unit 5: Human Biologyexhales. The heart circulates blood from the lungs, carrying oxygen -
ated red blood cells, down the arteries to the cells, where oxygen is 
released and carbon dioxide is absorbed. Then the used blood is sent 
back through the veins to the lungs, and the cycle begins again.
Table 5.6 Summary: Comparison of inspiration and expiration
Disorders of the Breathing System
All breathing disorders share one common characteristic: they all 
decrease oxygen delivery to the tissues. The following activity will 
help you to explore the different types of breathing disorders.
Some of the breathing disorders are:
Bronchitis
Breathing difficulties can be caused by bacteria or viral illnesses, 
as well as reactions to environmental pollutants. Bronchitis is a 
condition in which the airways narrow and the mucous lining of the 
bronchial tubes becomes inflamed. Excess mucus production, tissue 
swelling, constriction of the airways, and restricted airflow through 
the bronchi are all symptoms of this condition. In the bronchioles, 
the situation becomes even more acute. The bronchioles, unlike the 
trachea and bronchi, are not maintained by cartilage bands to keep 
them open.
Emphysema
The alveolar walls become irritated in emphysema. The air sacs lose 
their flexibility, stretch, and eventually rupture as a result of this. As 
a result, exhaling becomes difficult, and air is trapped in the lungs. 
Because there are fewer alveoli, the surface area available for gas 
exchange is reduced, resulting in lower oxygen levels. Emphysema 
is caused by smoking, which is by far the most common cause. 
Chronic bronchitis has been linked to emphysema. COPD (chronic Parts of respiratory system Inspiration Expiration
1. Diaphram Contracts and flattens down -
wardsRelaxes and moves upwards to 
dome shape
2. External Intercostal Muscles Muscles contract Muscles relaxes
3. Internal Intercostal Muscles Muscles relax Muscles contract
4. Ribcage And Sternum Move upwards and out wards Moves downwards and inwards
5. Thorax Volumes Increases Decreases
Air Pressure Decrease in pressure inside 
thorax and lungIncreases in pressure inside thorax 
and lung
Air Movement External air pressure drives 
air into lungs at low pressureAir forced out of lungs by thorax 
compression and elastic recoil of 
lungs
Activity 5.27 Individual 
presentation
Conduct internet searches /
consult health professionals/ 
users about the effects of 
smoking and cannabis on 
the normal functioning of 
the breathing system and 
present your findings to your 
classmates. During your 
presentation, use virtual 
lab (simulation software, 
animation and video) as 
available.
136
Grade 10 Biology Unit 5: Human Biologyobstructive pulmonary disease) is the name given to both of these 
conditions. COPD, like bronchitis, causes the bronchioles to become 
more resist[pant to air movement. Although air moves freely into 
the alveoli, the smaller diameter of the bronchioles increases barrier 
to air movement out of the lungs, making exhalation difficult. The 
breathing rate increases as the body attempts to maintain homeostasis. 
The circulatory system responds by speeding up the heartbeat.
Bronchial Asthma
The inflammation of the bronchioles is linked to bronchial asthma. 
Exhaling requires more work than inhaling in asthma. The imbalance 
between the amount of air entering and leaving the lungs must be 
addressed by increasing the exertion of expiration. Common causes 
for asthma are tobacco smoking, pollution, and allergens such as 
pollen, mold, dust, etc. 
5.4 The Human Urinary system
At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
•	discuss	the	structure	and	function	of	the	kidney,
•	identify	the	process	of	urine	formation, 	and
•	tell	the	role	of	the	excretory	system	in	the	homeostatic	process.Objectives
You may be familiar with the functions of the excretory system, 
which include blood purification and waste removal. The system, on 
the other hand, performs additional equally vital functions. Consider 
pH control, which is shared by the lungs and blood buffers such as 
carbonic acid (H2CO3) and bicarbonate anion (HCO3-) in order to 
maintain blood pH between 7.35 and 7.45 as the value higher than 
7.8 or lower than 6.8 can lead to death.
The kidneys produce 85% of the erythropoietin (EPO) needed 
to drive red blood cell formation. The kidneys also undertake the 
final synthesis step in the creation of vitamin D. When the kidneys 
fail, these functions are weakened or removed entirely, causing You will be provided with 
diagrams or models of 
the human excretory 
system(kidney) and you 
should draw, label, and 
study the structure and 
function of the excretory 
system(Kidney). Finally, 
present your diagram to 
your classmates. Support 
your activity using 
virtual lab (simulation 
software, animation and 
video). You can browse 
from internet, books and 
school digital libraries.
What do you know about the excretory system of human beings?
What do you know about regulating the concentration of solutes 
in the blood? Did you know that the kidney is important in 
determining the concentration of red blood cells?
137
Grade 10 Biology Unit 5: Human Biologyhomeostasis to be disrupted. Weakness, fatigue, shortness of breath, 
anemia, generalized edema (swelling), metabolic acidosis, increased 
potassium levels, heart arrhythmias, and other symptoms may occur 
in the affected person. Each of these functions is critical to your 
survival and well-being.
The section explains the anatomy of the excretory system and how 
it facilitates the physiologic tasks required for equilibrium. The 
kidney should be thought of as a plasma regulator rather than a urine 
maker. As you read through each section, consider the following 
scenario: What if this doesn’t work? This inquiry will assist you in 
comprehending how the urinary system maintains homeostasis and 
influences all other bodily systems as well as one’s quality of life.
External structure of kidney
The kidneys are a pair of bean-shaped organs in the abdominal 
cavity that are placed directly below the liver. The endocrine system 
includes the adrenal glands, which are located on top of each kidney. 
Blood is purified and filtered by the kidneys. The kidneys filter all of 
the blood in the human body on a daily basis, consuming over 25% 
of the oxygen taken by the lungs in the process. Through aerobic 
respiration, oxygen enables kidney cells to produce chemical energy 
in the form of ATP .
Urine  is the filtrate that comes out of the kidneys. The ureters, which 
are around 30 cm long, transport urine from the kidneys to the urinary 
bladder. Urine is driven through the ureters by waves of peristalsis, 
rather than passively draining into the bladder (smooth muscle 
contractions). Urine from both ureters is collected in the bladder. Its 
capacity is diminished during late pregnancy because to compression 
by the increasing uterus, resulting in increased urination frequency. 
Urine is transported from the bladder to the exterior of the body via 
the urethra.
The only urologic organ that differs significantly between males and 
girls is the urethra; all other urine transport systems are identical. 
Female urethras are shorter than male urethras, measuring around 
4 cm in length, and provide less protection against fecal germs 
(approximately 20 cm). The increased frequency of urinary tract 
infections (UTIs) in women can be explained by this length disparity. 
In males, the urethra also serves as a reproductive organ, transporting 
sperm (sperm and accessory fluids). Activity 5.28 Group work
Being in groups of 3-4 
students and using locally 
available resources construct 
a model of the kidney and 
discuss its structure and 
functions. 
What do we call the filtrate that leaves the human urinary 
system? 
138
Grade 10 Biology Unit 5: Human BiologyInternal structure of kidney 
The kidney is divided into three sections on the inside: an outer 
cortex, a medulla in the middle, and the renal pelvis in the hilum 
of the kidney. The hilum is the concave portion of the bean form 
where blood arteries and nerves enter and exit the kidney, as well as 
where the ureters exit. The presence of renal corpuscles causes the 
renal cortex to be granular, and nephron tubules can be observed 
throughout the renal cortex and renal pyramids, which make up the 
majority of the renal medulla. Each kidney has an average of eight 
renal pyramids. The urine produced by the nephrons passes via the 
renal pelvis and into the ureters, which transport it to the bladder 
(5.24).
The network of blood arteries in the kidney is an important part of 
its anatomy and function because it filters blood. The renal hilum 
is where the arteries, veins, and nerves that supply the kidney enter 
and exit. Renal blood flow begins with the aorta branching into renal 
arteries and finishes with the renal veins exiting to join the inferior 
vena cava, which takes blood back to the heart’s right atrium. Before 
branching into several afferent arterioles and entering the capillaries 
supplying the nephrons, the renal arteries split multiple times to form Do you know the three parts of the renal tubule? What are they?
Figure 5.23 Kidneys filter the 
blood and produce urine that 
is stored in the bladder before 
removal
Figure 5.24.The internal 
structure of the kidney
139
Grade 10 Biology Unit 5: Human Biologyadditional blood vessels. As mentioned previously, the functional 
unit of the kidney is the nephron,  illustrated in figure 5.25. Each 
kidney is made up of over one million nephrons  that dot the renal 
cortex. A nephron consists of three parts: 
• a renal corpuscle, 
• a renal tubule, and 
• the associated capillary network.
Figure 5.25. The Structure of a nephron. 
Renal corpuscle
The glomerulus, a network of capillaries that surrounds the renal 
corpuscle in the renal cortex, is made up of the glomerular or 
Bowman’s capsule, a cup-shaped chamber that surrounds it (Figure 
5.25).
Renal Tubule
The renal tubule is a long, convoluted structure that emerges from the 
glomerulus and can be split into three segments based on function: 
1. the Proximal Convoluted Tubule (PCT), 
2. the loop of Henle, which forms a loop (with descending and 
ascending limbs), and
140
Grade 10 Biology Unit 5: Human Biology3. the Distal Convoluted Tubule (DCT). The DCT, or distal 
collecting duct, joins and discharges the nephron’s contents into 
collecting ducts. Urine will eventually pass via the renal pelvis 
and into the ureters.
Capillary Network within the Nephron
The nephron receives blood that needs to be filtered via a capillary 
network that branches off from the renal arteries. Afferent arterioles 
are the branches that enter the glomerulus. Efferent arteriole refers 
to the branch that leaves the glomerulus. The glomerular capillary 
bed is the capillary network that runs through the glomerulus. The 
peritubular capillary network surrounds and interacts with portions 
of the renal tubule after the efferent arteriole exits the glomerulus.
The formation of urine 
Kidneys filter blood in a three-step process:
The nephrons filter blood as it passes through the glomerulus’ 
capillary network. Except for proteins, almost all solutes are filtered 
out into the glomerulus by a process known as glomerular filtration.
The filtrate is collected in the tubules of the kidneys. Tubular 
reabsorption is the process by which most of the solutes are 
reabsorbed in the PCT. The filtrate continues to exchange solutes 
and water with the peritubular capillary network in the Henle loop. 
During this phase, water is also reabsorbed.
Tubular secretion, which is essentially the inverse of tubular 
reabsorption, secretes extra solutes and wastes into the renal tubules. 
The collecting ducts collect filtrate from the nephrons, which are 
then carried into the renal pelvis and eventually to the ureters as 
urine. The full procedure is depicted in Figure 5.26.
Figure 5.26. The process of urine formation in the kidneyWhat are the functions of 
the kidney?
Activity 5.29 Group work
In group of 3-4 students 
answer the following 
questions with examples.
1. Do you find any 
relationship between 
circulatory system and 
excretory system? What 
are they?
2. Nowadays our society is 
affected by kidney diseases. 
What could be the reason?
141
Grade 10 Biology Unit 5: Human BiologyEach part of the nephron performs a different function in filtering 
waste and maintaining
Homeostatic balance:
1. The glomerulus forces small solutes out of the blood by pressure. 
2. The proximal convoluted tubule actively transfers toxins and 
medications from the interstitial fluid into the filtrate, reabsorbing 
ions, water, and nutrients from the filtrate. By selectively secreting 
ammonia (NH3) into the filtrate, where it interacts with H+ to 
generate NH4+, the proximal convoluted tubule also regulates 
blood pH. More ammonia is secreted when the filtrate is acidic.
3.  Aquaporin-containing cells border the descending loop of Henle, 
allowing water to flow from the filtrate into the interstitial fluid.
4. Na+ and Cl- ions diffuse into the interstitial fluid in the thin 
section of the ascending loop of Henle. These same ions are 
actively transferred into the interstitial fluid in the thick region. 
The filtrate becomes increasingly dilute as it passes up the leg 
because salt but not water is lost.
5. K+ and H+ ions are selectively secreted into the filtrate in the distal 
convoluted tubule, while Na+, Cl-, and HCO3- ions are reabsorbed 
to maintain blood pH and electrolyte balance.
6. Solutes and water from the filtrate are reabsorbed by the collecting 
duct, resulting in dilute urine.
5. 5 The immune system
The Immunity system
Immunity is defined as the body’s ability to prevent the invasion 
of pathogens. The immune system includes varieties of defences 
against viruses, bacteria, fungal infections, and parasites (such as 
threadworms). The lymphatic system is part of the broader immune 
system. The types of immune systems include innate and adaptive 
(Acquired) immune systems.In a group of 3 students, 
discuss the immune 
system and types of 
immunity, and present 
your findings to the class 
with the guidance of your 
teacher.
 At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
•	define	what	is	immunity,
•	mention	types	of	immunity, 	and
•	discuss	what	is	innate	and	acquired	immunity. Objectives
Mothers are recommended to breastfeed their kids immediately 
after delivery. Do you know why?
142
Grade 10 Biology Unit 5: Human Biologya) Innate immune system
The body’s initial line of defense against invading microbial diseases 
is innate immunity. Pattern recognition receptors (PRRs), which are 
produced by innate immune cells, help to maintain homeostasis by 
regulating endogenous processes including inflammation and cell 
death.
These are the non-specific, unchanging lines of defenses which 
include:
• Physical and chemical barriers to pathogens.
• To attract immune cells to infection locations, cytokines and other 
chemical agents are produced.
• To recognize bacteria, stimulate cells, and facilitate the clearance 
of dead cells or antibody complexes, the complement cascade is 
activated.
• Specialized white blood cells identify and remove foreign 
compounds found in organs, tissues, blood, and lymph.
ii) Adaptive (Acquired) immune system
After an initial reaction to a new pathogen, adaptive (or acquired) 
immunity is formed, resulting in an increased response to future 
exposure to the same disease. Vaccination is based on this acquired 
immunity process. Because bacteria and viruses are always changing 
and evolving in an ‘arms war’ with our immune systems, this is critical. 
The adaptive immune system has the following characteristics:
• During the antigen presentation process, particular “non-self” 
antigens are recognized.
• The development of targeted responses to eradicate specific 
infections or pathogen-infected cells.
• Immunological memory is the process through which signature 
antibodies or T cell receptors “remember” each infection. If another 
infection arises, these memory cells can be summoned to eliminate 
the invader swiftly.What do you know about the vaccines against certain diseases 
e.g. vaccine against COVID-19?
Do you have any idea about the cells of the immune system? 
What types of cells of the immune system do you know?
143
Grade 10 Biology Unit 5: Human BiologyCells of the immune system 
The immune system is made up of numerous different cell types and 
subtypes. The following are some of the most common types:
Lymphocytes : White blood cells that travel between the bloodstream 
and the lymphatic system. They are crucial in the battle against 
infection. T cells, B cells, and natural killer cells are the three most 
common types of lymphocytes. Lymphocytes are formed in the bone 
marrow. Some move to the thymus and mature into T cells, while 
others mature into B cells in the bone marrow.
Neutrophils : The most common form of white blood cell, neutrophils 
play a vital role in the innate immune system. A type of phagocyte 
is neutrophils (cells that engulf and then digest cellular debris 
and pathogens). They are ordinarily located in the bloodstream, 
but chemical signals like Interleukin-8 cause them to be promptly 
recruited to the site of injury or infection.
Macrophages : phagocytes that play a role in both the innate and 
adaptive immune systems are another form of phagocyte. Foreign 
chemicals, pathogenic bacteria, and cancer cells are all targets for 
them. Lymphocytes and other immune cells are also stimulated by 
macrophages to respond to infections.
Dendritic cells : Antigen-presenting cells serve as intermediaries 
between the innate and adaptive immune systems. They are 
frequently found in tissues that come into contact with the outside 
world, such as the skin, nose, lungs, stomach, and gut linings. They 
travel to lymph nodes in response to infections, where they interact 
with T cells and B cells to start the adaptive immune response.
Antigens and antibodies
Antibodies (also called immunoglobulins) are Y-shaped proteins 
produced by B-cells that bind to antigens on the surface of foreign 
substances like bacteria and viruses. This recognizes and identifies 
the foreign thing as “non-self, ” prompting other immune cells to 
attack it.
Hormones and the immune system
The immune system produces a wide range of hormones. Lymphokines 
are the common name for these hormones. The immune system is 
suppressed by steroids and corticosteroids (adrenaline components).
144
Grade 10 Biology Unit 5: Human Biology5.6 Renowned Physicians in Ethiopia
1. Prof. Asrat Woldeyes  (1928-1999) was the first distinguished 
Ethiopian surgeon and professor of medicine in Addis Ababa 
University. He was the first Ethiopian to qualify in this field of 
medicine in the West after medical studies at Edinburgh University. 
He devoted the majority of his working life to surgery at Addis 
Adaba’s two main hospitals, as well as the deanship of medicine at 
the university.
 
2. Dr. Widad KidaneMariam  was born to an Ethiopian emigrant 
family in Palestine during the Italian occupation of her country of 
origin. She studied medicine at the American University of Beirut 
and became the “first female” medical practitioner and topmost 
physician administrator in charge of the medical services division in 
the Ministry of Health in the 1960s-1970s. When she was asked to be 
the first Ethiopian gynecologist to volunteer for the Swedish Save the 
Children Fund project in Addis Abeba, she also became a founding 
organizer responsible for the establishment of the first Ethiopian 
Family Planning Association as well as Maternal and Child services 
for the homeless in Addis Abeba Municipality.      At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
•	mention	renowned	Ethiopian	physicians,
•	discuss	contributions	of	renowned	Ethiopian	physicians, 	
and
•	appreciate	the	contributions	of	Ethiopian	physicians. Objectives
Activity 5.30 THINK-PAIR-SHARE
In Ethiopia, as it is true in all countries of the world, the history of 
medicine begins much earlier and the number of physicians that 
contributed to their country has increased time to time. Here are 
mentioned two of the most renowned pioneer Ethiopian physicians. 
Now, being in groups of 3-4 students and using books, internet and 
interviewing as a source of information:
1.  List down names of the renowned Ethiopian physicians.
2.   Write a report on their contributions to Ethiopian society 
and the world.
3.  Finally, share your findings to the whole classroom.
Prof. Asrat Woldeyes  
 Dr. Widad Kidane Mariam
145
Grade 10 Biology Unit 5: Human Biology• The digestive tract is made up of the alimentary canal and its auxiliary organs, which break down 
food into molecules that may be absorbed and used by the body’s cells.
• In the body, food travels through four different processes: ingestion, digestion, absorption, and 
excretion.
• The digestive system has six actions or tasks that prepare nutrients for use by body cells: ingestion, 
mechanical digestion, chemical digestion, motions, absorption, and elimination. The wall of the 
digestive tract has four layers or tunics: mucosa, submucosa, muscular layer, and serous layer or 
serosa.
• The alimentary tract and accessory organs are the two primary components of the digestive system.
• The mouth, pharynx, esophagus, stomach, small and large intestines, rectum, and anus are all 
parts of the digestive system’s alimentary tract.
• The salivary glands, liver, gallbladder, and pancreas are all accessory organs that are connected to 
the alimentary system.
• Secretions of organs and glands in the digestive system
Organ/gland 
of secretionSecretion(s) Function
Salivary 
glandsSalivary amylase Initiates the breakdown of polysaccharides to simpler carbohy -
drates
Stomach Hydrochloric acid Converts pepsinogen to pepsin; kills microbes 
Pepsinogen when converted to pepsin, initiates the digestion of proteins
Mucus protects the stomach from pepsin and Hydrochloric acid 
(HCl)
Pancreas Pancreatic Amy -
laseContinues the breakdown of carbohydrates into disaccharides
Bicarbonate ions neutralize Hydrochloric acid (HCl) from the stomach
Trypsinogen when activated to trypsin, converts long- chain peptides into 
short-chain peptides
Lipase Breaks down fats to glycerol and fatty acids
Small intes -
tineErepsin Completes the breakdown of proteins 
Disaccharidases 
(e.g., maltase)breakdown disaccharides (e.g., maltose) into monosaccharide
Liver Bile Emulsifies fat
Gallbladder Bile Stores and secretes concentrated bile from the liver
Large intes -
tineMucus Helps the movement of food waste
• The cardiovascular system is made up of a muscle pumping apparatus called the heart, as well as 
a closed system of vessels called arteries, veins, and capillaries.
• The heart is a muscle pump that provides the required force to circulate blood throughout the 
body’s tissues.
• The epicardium, myocardium, and endocardium are the three layers of the heart.
• The right atrium, right ventricle, left atrium, and left ventricle is the four chambers of the heart.Unit Review
146
Grade 10 Biology Unit 5: Human Biology• Atrioventricular valves and semi-lunar valves are two types of heart valves.
• The right atrium pumps blood to the right ventricle, which then pumps it to the lungs, where it 
receives oxygen. Blood goes from the lungs to the left atrium and subsequently to the left ventricle. 
It is then injected into the systemic circulatory system.
• The conduction system of the heart is made up of specialized cardiac muscle cells that coordinate 
the contraction of the chambers.
• Blood travels from the right ventricle to the lungs and returns to the left atrium via the pulmonary 
arteries.
• The systemic vessels transport blood from the left ventricle to all regions of the body’s tissues 
before returning it to the right atrium.
• Diffusion, filtration, and osmosis are all ways for substances to flow past the capillary wall.
• Ventilation, external respiration, gas transfer, internal respiration, and cellular respiration are all 
part of the respiration process.
• The pharynx also referred to as the throat, is a tract that runs from the base of the skull to the sixth 
cervical vertebra.
• The larynx, often known as the voice box, is an airway that connects the pharynx above and the 
trachea below.
• The major airway to the lungs is the trachea, sometimes known as the windpipe.
• The trachea is divided into the right and left principal bronchi, which branch off into smaller and 
smaller passages until they reach alveoli, which are tiny air sacs.
• Beyond the major bronchi, the two lungs contain all of the bronchial tree’s components.
• The right lung is narrower, wider, and divided into three lobes than the left lung.
• The left lung is longer, narrower, and divided into two lobes than the right lung.
• The urinary system eliminates waste products from the body, controls fluid volume, maintains 
electrolyte concentrations in body fluids, regulates blood pH, and secretes erythropoietin and 
renin.
• The kidneys, ureters, urinary bladder, and urethra are all parts of the urinary system.
• The parenchyma of the kidney is made up of the cortex and medulla.
• The renal pelvis is located in the center of the kidney and collects urine as it is produced.
• A nephron, which is made up of a renal corpuscle and a renal tubule, is the functional unit of the 
kidney.
• Urine is transported from the kidney to the urinary bladder via the ureters.
• The urinary bladder serves as a temporary urine storage reservoir.
• The urethra is the last tube through which urine flows.
• An involuntary internal urethral sphincter and a voluntary external urethral sphincter govern the 
passage of urine through the urethra.
147
Grade 10 Biology Unit 5: Human BiologyI. True False Items: Say “ True” or “False” for the following statements  on your exercise book. 
 1. Blood pressure is highest in veins. 
 2. Atherosclerosis is the build-up of plaque inside arteries.
 3. Platelets are blood cells that fight infections.
 4. Food travels from the mouth to the stomach because of gravity.
 5. Most absorption of nutrients takes place in the stomach.
 6. For good health, you should never eat lipids.
 7. The kidneys are the main organs of the excretory system.
 8. Nephrons carry urine out of the body.
II. Multiple Choice Items:  Choose the correct answer from A - E and write on your exercise book.
1.  Part of the alimentary canal where mechanical digestion and the chemical digestion of 
polysaccharides begin.
     A. Mouth B. Stomach C. Liver D. Small Intestine E. None of the above
2. The 1st location in the digestive system where peristalsis occurs:
 A. Mouth B. Esophagous  C. Stomach D. Small Intestine E. Large Intestine
3.  Where in the alimentary canal does pepsinogens are activated into pepsin to aid in the digestion 
of proteins.
    A. Mouth B. Esophagous   C. Stomach D. Small Intestine E. Pancreas
4. The organ that releases many enzymes that aid in the breakdown of all types of organic molecules:-
    A. Mouth B. Gall Bladder C. Stomach    D. Liver  E. Pancreas
5. The tube though which food and air (that you breathe) passes:-
    A. Esophagous B. Larynx C. Trachea D. Pharynx E. Rectum.
6. Bile is produced in _____________ .
     A. Salivary Glands B. Pancreas C. Stomach D. Liver E. Gall Bladder 
7. Which of the following organs produce insulin, required for glucose uptake into body cells?
     A. Liver     B. Gall Bladder     C. Pancreas  D. Stomach E. None of the above  
8. Which of the following is not  a major task of the digestive system?
     A. Secretion B. Digestion   C. Absorption  D. Elimination E. Circulation
9. Which of the following is not considered an accessory gland to the digestive system?
      A. Wall of the gastrointestinal tract GI)    C. Liver
 B. Salivary Glands        D. Pancreas 
 E. All of the aboveReview Questions
148
Grade 10 Biology Unit 5: Human Biology10. Rank the following blood vessels in order of their average pressure, from highest to lowest:  
	 					artery, 	vein, 	arteriole, 	venule, 	aorta, 	capillary.
 A. Capillary > vein >venule> arteriole > artery > aorta
 B. Aorta > arteriole >venule> artery > vein > capillary
 C. Aorta > artery > arteriole > capillary >venule> vein
 D. Capillary > arteriole >venule> artery > vein > aorta
 E. None of the above
11. Which of the following statement about circulatory systems is false?
 A.  In closed circulatory systems, blood flows through vessels that are separate from the 
interstitial fluid of the body.
 B. The earthworm has a closed circulatory system.
 C. In an open circulatory system, the hemolymph empties into the body cavity.
 D.  Lobsters are organisms that have closed circulatory systems.
12. Red blood cells are also known as:-
 A.  Lymphocytes   B. monocytes     C. erythrocytes    D. basophils
13. How does the structure of red blood cells allow them to deliver oxygen to the cells of the body?
 A. Their size and shape allow them to carry and transfer oxygen.
 B. Their disc shape contains many small vesicles that allow them to carry and transfer oxygen.
 C. They have nuclei and do not contain haemoglobin.
 D. They contain coagulation factors and antibodies.
 E. All of the above
14. Which of the following best describes plasma?
 A. It is a protein synthesized in the liver.
 B. It is a liquid that contains only lipids and antibodies.
 C. It is a blood component that is separated by spinning blood.
 D. It is an antibody produced in the mucosal lining.
 E. All of the above except A
15. Which of the following is a function of the breathing system?
      A. gas exchange    C. transport of oxygen
      B. absorption of nutrients  D. structural support  E. A and D
16. The trachea leads to the ____.
 A. bronchioles    B. Bronchii   C. oesophagus   D. pulmonary vessel  E. Nasal cavity  
149
Grade 10 Biology Unit 5: Human Biology17.  The space at the back of the mouth, which leads either to the airway or the esophagus is the:
 A. larynx              B. nasal cavity   C. Pharynx  D. None of the above
18.  Oxygen from the air enters the bloodstream through:-
 A. cardiac notch   B. pulmonary vein   C. alveoli   D. paranasal sinuses E. larynx
19.  When the diaphragm contracts (is pulled downward), _______  occurs.
 A. inhalation    C. hiccup    
 B. exhalation   D. Lung collapse   E. Both exhalation and inhalation
20. Which one of the following is the correct path urine takes as it moves through the urinary system?
 A. kidneys - ureters - bladder – urethra C. bladder - kidneys -urethra – ureters
 B. ureters - kidneys - bladder - urethra  D. Uretra – kidneys – Ureters – badder
 E. None of the above
21.  The __________  is the functional unit of the kidney.
 A. Villus   C. Lymph node   
 B. Alveoli   D. Nephron E. All of the above
22. Which of the following substances are not  filtered out of the blood in the nephrons?
 A. Blood cells and proteins  C. Urea and water 
 B. Glucose and amino acids   D. Salts and hormones E. A and C 
23. All of the substances that are removed from the blood via the Bowman’s capsule are called __.
 A. Plasma B. Filtrate C. Urine  D. Lymph   W  E. C and D 
24.  What substances must be reabsorbed back into the blood from the convoluted tubule and loop 
of Henle?
 A. Water    B. Salts   C. Glucose  D. All of the above E. None of the above
25.  Urine is primarily composed of:
 A. Lymph  B. Red blood cells   C. Carbon dioxide D. Water     E. Oxygen
26. What is the role of liver in the maintenance of homeostasis?
 A. Stores extra carbohydrates in the form of glycogen  
 B. Produces bile to aid in fat digestion
 C. Produces clotting proteins  D. All of the above E. Only A and B
III. Fill in the Blanks: Fill in the blank with the term that best completes the sentence.
 1. Blood pressure that is higher than normal termed ____________ .
 2. The liquid part of blood is referred to as ____________ .
 3. Blood type is determined by the presence or absence of ____________  on blood cells.
150
Grade 10 Biology Unit 5: Human Biology  4. Tiny sacs in the lungs where gas exchange takes place are called ____________ .
  5. The disease in which air passages of the lungs periodically become too narrow is ____________ .
  6.   A wave of involuntary muscle contractions that moves food through the digestive system is 
called ____________ .
  7.  The physical breakdown of chunks of food into smaller pieces is referred to as ___________  
digestion.
  8. The small intestine is lined with tiny finger-like projections named ____________ .
  9. Solid waste that leaves the large intestine is known as ____________ .
  10. Nutrients needed in small amounts for the body to function properly are____________ .
IV. Short Answer Items
  1. Which enzymes secreted by the pancreas promote digestion?
2.  Explain the chemicals and processes involved in protein and carbohydrate digestion. Why are 
carbohydrates not digested in the stomach?
3.  List the lipid-digesting enzymes secreted from the pancreas. Do these enzymes allow for a complete 
breakdown of lipids?
4.  How is the duodenum protected against stomach acid? Why does pepsin remain inactive in 
the duodenum?
5.  In cases of extreme obesity, a section of the small intestine may be removed. What effect do you 
think does this procedure have on the patient?
6.  Describe what the inside of the small intestine looks like and how this organ increases thethe 
efficiency of its operation.
Write the structures A-L
1. -----------
2. -----------
3. -----------
4. -----------
5. -----------
6. -----------
7. -----------
8. -----------
9. -----------
10. -----------
11. -----------
12. -----------
151
Grade 10 Biology Unit 5: Human Biology7. Discuss functions of the circulatory system?  
8. Mention types of blood circulation in human body?  
9. Define pulmonary Circulation.
10. What is the difference between pulmonary and Systemic Circulation?
11. Discuss the effect of fat deposits on the artery walls.
12. State functions of the right atrium.  
13. What is the function of the right ventricle?
14. Why muscles of the heart on the left side are thicker?
15. Label the following kidney diagram following the letters pointed at each structure
 Write the structures A-F
1. -----------
2. -----------
3. -----------
4. -----------
5. -----------
6. -----------
7. -----------
152
Grade 10 Biology Contents Learning Competency
1.1 Trophic levels  
1.1.1 Food chains & Food webs
1.1.2 Flow energy and matter through ecosystems
1.2 Cycling of materials in the ecosystem 
1.2.1 Water cycle
1.2.2 Carbon cycle 
1.2.3 Nitrogen cycle
1.2.4 Phosphorus cycle1.1 outline with examples the trophic levels in an 
ecosystem 
1.2 elaborate food chain and food web with 
examples 
1.3 show the flow of energy and matter in an 
ecosystem
1.4 discuss ecological pyramid 
1.5 draw and label the water, carbon, nitrogen and 
phosphorus cycles
1.6 relate the carbon cycle with global warming 
1.7 associate nitrogen cycle with soil fertility and 
agriculture 
1.8 appreciate the role of soil organisms in soil 
fertility
1.9 investigate why farmers in their locality use crop 
rotation in cultivation 
6.1 Trophic Levels 
 At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
•	Define	trophic	level, 	food	chain, 	and	food	web	,
•	construct		food	chain	and	food	web-based	on		observed		
feeding	relationship	among	common	organisms	in	their	
locality		and	
•	outline	the	flow	of	energy		from	the		sun	to	plants	than	to	a	
higher	trophic	level. Objectives
6.1.1 Food chain and food web 
Have you observed solar panels used to collect energy from the 
sun, which transform solar energy to electrical energy for different 
purposes?  Your answer might be yes, however, the best way to trap 
and store energy from sunlight is to grow plants and use the food they 
synthesize.  This stored energy is transferred to other living organisms 
that eat plants and themselves have been eaten by another organism. 
Thus, the ultimate source of energy in living organisms is the sun. 
       Unit 6: Ecological Interactions                    A cat always hunts a 
rat. You know what 
will happen if a hyena 
and dog come together. 
What does this remind 
you about feeding 
relationship in your 
environment?  
What is the ultimate source of energy in life? How is energy 
transferred from organism to organism?
153
Grade 10 Biology Unit 6: Ecological Interactions                   In this lesson, you will learn how energy is transferred from plants 
through a series of organisms. Plants are the first to trap energy 
and produce their food. They are called producers, also known 
as autotrophs (self – feeding). Animals feed on either plants or 
other animals as a source of energy. They are known as consumers 
or heterotrophs, feeding on plants (herbivores) or other animals 
(carnivores) or feed on both plants and animals (omnivores). Thus, 
energy is transferred from plants through a chain of organisms, 
employing the “to eat or to be eaten“process. This process is known as 
the food chain or food web.
The following are characteristic features of  a  food chain
	There is repeated process of “to eat or to be eaten” , so the food chain 
represent nutritive interaction among biotic component of the 
ecosystem.
	Plants (producers) are at the base or beginning of the food chain. 
	There is the unidirectional flow of energy from the sun to the 
producers and then to series of consumers. 
Omnivorous (animals that feed both on plants and other animals) 
occupy more than one position in the food chain.
You daily observe that one organism does not eat one organism 
only.  Every organism eats different organisms and it can be eaten 
by other different organisms. Therefore, ecosystems normally exhibit 
multidirectional energy flow, which is more than a direct chain of 
who – eats – what. What is occurring in the ecosystem is a complex 
web structure, called the food web. A food web is an interconnected 
food chain that makes interwoven or web-like structures. As shown 
in Figure 6.1 food chain follows a single path whereas the food web 
follows multiple paths. 
Figure 6.1 Schematic illustrations of the food chain and food web 
(P = producer, H= Herbivore, C1= Primary carnivore, C2 = Secondary 
carnivore).How does energy flow in 
food chain?
Is it the unidirectional 
flow of energy that is 
commonly observed in an 
ecosystem?
154
Grade 10 Biology Unit 6: Ecological Interactions                  Each organism occupies a specific position in the food chain, called 
trophic level. Basically, a trophic level indicates the position of the 
organism in an order of receiving energy and usually ranges from 1 to 
3 or 4 trophic levels.  Plants, which are the first to trap solar energy, 
stand at the first trophic level; herbivores that eat plants stand   at the 
second trophic level and carnivores that eat herbivores stand at the 
third trophic level (Figure 6.2). 
The feeding level is the order of consuming or eating one another. 
Herbivores are at the first feeding level consuming plants also known 
as primary consumers. Carnivores that eat herbivores stand at the 
second feeding level and so on.  
Figure 6.2 Illustration of Trophic level ACTIVITY 6.1  Think – Pair – Share  
Direction:
Think of a possible feeding relationship of organisms commonly 
observed in your locality.
Share your ideas with your classmates. Discuss whether it is a food 
chain or food web that is observed on the ground and anticipate why 
this is so.
Based on the food web illustrated below, construct different short 
food chains and share your work with other groups.
Lizard 
hawk 
Snake  Grasshopper
Grass
Rat Rabbit  
ACTIVITY 6.2  Field  Visit 
• Your teacher will arrange 
a short visit to your school 
garden or corner  with 
grass   for you to observe  
feeding relationship among 
organisms
• You may encounter insects 
like grasshopper. Observe 
what these insects feed on 
and which organisms are 
hunting grasshoppers. Take 
field note on  the different  
feeding relationships that  
you observed 
• After coming to class, 
discuss with your small 
group on what you 
observed and construct a 
food chain and /or food 
web to show feeding 
relationship among 
organisms.
• Prepare a report and 
submit it to your teacher  
as an input for class 
discussion.What is  a trophic level? 
How is it different from 
feeding level?
Producer 
155
Grade 10 Biology Unit 6: Ecological Interactions                   6.1. 2 Flow of energy and matter through ecosystem 
You already know that the ultimate source of energy in life is the sun. 
You have also learned that it is solar energy trapped by the producer 
during photosynthesis that flows through a series of organisms by a 
food chain or food web.  As shown in Figure 6.3, the energy from the 
sun flows through organisms, but this energy cannot go back to the 
sun. This is why we say energy cannot be recycled - it flows through 
the ecosystem. However, nutrients in food (organic matter) recycle 
within an ecosystem and are reused over and over again. This is the 
result of composition (synthesis) and decomposition (breakdown), 
which take place in the ecosystem. 
Plants synthesize food (organic matter) from simple inorganic matter. 
When producers or consumers die, fungi and other decomposers 
obtain energy by breaking down the organic matter and in the process; 
they return key nutrients like nitrogen to the soil so that producers 
can use them as raw materials for photosynthesis. 
Figure 6.3 Flow of energy and matter (inorganic and organic) in an 
ecosystem 
As energy flows from one trophic level to the next it successively 
declines in amount. Fig 6.4 demonstrates how energy contained in 
the grass is not fully transferred to a cow that feeds on the grass. It 
is only about 10% of the energy in grass that will turn to biomass 
(living organic mass) in the body of the cow. The rest (90% of the 
total energy) is lost as heat or used for different activities of the cow How does energy  flow in an ecosystem during a nutrient 
recycle?
What happens to energy 
as it is transferred from 
one trophic level  to the 
next trophic level?
156
Grade 10 Biology Unit 6: Ecological Interactions                  or removed from the cow’s digestive system as an undigested and 
indigestible food item. 
The flow of energy at each trophic level in a particular ecosystem can 
be shown using an ecological pyramid (Figure 6.5). It is constructed 
using horizontal bars, where each bar represents organisms of specific 
trophic levels and their order, which is based on who eats whom. 
The ecological pyramid primarily represents the flow of energy with 
the producers (first trophic level) at the very bottom, followed by 
the primary consumers (Herbivores), then secondary consumers 
(carnivores), and so on, with the highest trophic level being on the 
top of the pyramid.
The ecological pyramid can also be constructed to represent the 
biomass or number of organisms at each trophic level. Accordingly, 
there are three types of ecological pyramids namely: the pyramid 
of energy, the pyramid of number and the pyramid of biomass. The 
pyramid of energy is always upright and narrowing sharply from the 
base to the top-level carnivore because there is commonly 90% energy 
loss at each trophic level (Figure 6. 5).     
[In this example, a trophic efficiency of 10% is assumed in the 
What is an ecological 
pyramid ? How is it 
constructed ?
Figure 6.5 An Idealized 
pyramid of energy. Figure 6.4 Energy transfer 
from grass (producer) to cow 
(herbivore) 
157
Grade 10 Biology Unit 6: Ecological Interactions                   transfer of energy for each link in the food chain. Notice that the 
producer -   Grass, is capable of converting only 1% of solar energy by 
photosynthesis.
ACTIVITY 6.3  Think – Pair – Share  
Direction: 
Discuss with a friend sitting next to you and  answer the following 
questions
• Why is trophic level usually limited to 3 or 4? Why not more?
• What is the trophic level of a human being? Explain 
As opposed to pyramid of energy, pyramids of biomass or number can 
be upright (with the long bar at the base and shorter bar at the apex) 
or inverted depending on the type of ecosystem and the particular  
food chain (Figure 6.6) 
Figure 6.6 Illustration of the pyramid of number (A) and pyramid of 
biomass (B) in the aquatic food chain Biomass .  is the weight of liv -
ing organic matter contained  
or assimilated to  the  body 
of an organism per unit time 
Ecological pyramid.  This 
is a graphical representation 
of the feeding relationship 
of a group of organisms in 
the form of a pyramid. A 
horizontal bar is construct -
ed to represent the different 
trophic level or feeding lev -
el.  The bars at the base of 
the pyramid always repre -
sent plants (producers). The 
length of the bar shows the   
amount of energy (pyramid 
of energy), biomass (pyra -
mid of biomass) or number 
of organisms (pyramid of 
number) present at each tro -
phic level.  Key terms
ACTIVITY 6.4  Homework   
Direction: 
Based on the food chain:   Tree –bird–bird flea 
1. Construct pyramid of number and  pyramid of biomass  for the 
given food chain 
2. Compare  your pyramid with Figure 6.5 and comment on the 
difference 
3. What do you conclude about the pyramid of number and 
pyramid of biomass?A B
158
Grade 10 Biology Unit 6: Ecological Interactions                  6.2 Cycling of Materials in an Ecosystem
An ecosystem refers to the complex of living organisms (biotic 
component), their physical and chemical environment (abiotic 
component), and all their interaction and interrelationship in a 
particular unit of space. As materials in an ecosystem are found in a 
limited amount, it is essential that the same nutrients materials should 
continuously be reused, over and over again.  The cycling occurs 
between the biotic (living) and the abiotic (non-living) components 
of the ecosystem. The biotic component consists of plants, animals, 
and microorganisms while the abiotic comprises the atmosphere (air), 
hydrosphere (Aquatic/water), and lithosphere (soil). Materials always 
move around within an ecosystem when organisms feed, breathe, 
respire, and excrete. Nutrients are released when the waste product 
or dead bodies are decomposed. What is a waste product to one 
organism becomes a vital nutrient to another. For example, animal 
excreta (a waste product) will be broken down by decomposers, 
release nitrogen and phosphorous (vital nutrients) which will be used 
for plant growth, thereby increasing agricultural yield. Note that the 
waste product, instead of polluting the environment, can be a rich 
source of organic fertilizer. 
ACTIVITY 6.5   Peer discussion  
Direction: In pairs,  discuss  and answer the following questions 
• Why is the cycling of materials in an ecosystem so important?
• What will happen to organisms or life if decomposers are absent 
from  the ecosystem? At the end of this section, the student will be able to:
•	draw	and	label	the	water, 	carbon, 	nitrogen, 	and	
phosphorous	cycle,
•	relate	the	carbon	cycle	with	global	warming,
•	associate	nitrogen	with	soil	fertility	and	agriculture,
•	appreciate	the	role	of	soil	organisms	in	soil	fertility	and
•	identify	why	crop	rotation	is	important	to	farmers	 Objectives
What is the advantage of 
being vegetarian (feeding on 
plants and plant products)?Self Test
What is meant by cycling of materials in an ecosystem?
Decomposers are bacteria 
and fungi, commonly found 
in soil. They play key role 
in returning nutrient to the 
ecosystem.
Unlike ingesters, animals 
that swallow food (organic 
matter) and digest inside 
their gut, digestion in 
decomposers takes place 
outside the living body in 
the soil, or wherever the 
dead matter happens to be. 
Decomposers exhibit 
extracellular digestion by 
releasing enzymes on to the 
dead matter, digesting the 
complex organic matter into 
simpler and smaller ones 
and absorb these products 
of decomposition. Since 
the products released are 
accumulated in the external 
environment (soil), they 
serve as “nutrient pool” and 
increase soil fertility as well 
as plant productivity.Attention
What are the important materials that cycle through the 
ecosystem?
159
Grade 10 Biology Unit 6: Ecological Interactions                   In addition to water, there are 4 elements (nutrients) that cycle 
through the ecosystem: oxygen, carbon, nitrogen, and phosphorous. 
These elements take the path from the non - living environment to 
living organisms, such as trees, and then back to the non – living 
environment. The paths that include biological, geological, and 
chemical processes form cycles, known as the biogeochemical cycle. 
In this, subsection you will learn about the aforementioned major 
cycles in detail, discuss and share ideas in class. 
6.2.1 Water cycle 
Water on earth does not stay still. It is always on move.  Rain that falls 
at a particular place can be the result of evaporation that occurred at 
a distant ocean days before. Likewise, water in a river may have been 
rainfall somewhere at a distance or melting ice or snow from the top 
of high mountains. It is the water cycle that is responsible for water 
movement in the ocean, on the land, and in the atmosphere.
The earth has a limited amount of water. When examining the water 
on Earth, 97.5 percent of it is non-potable saltwater. Of the remaining 
water, 99 percent is locked underground as ground water or as icecap 
in the polar areas. Thus, less than 1 percent of freshwater is easily 
accessible from lakes and rivers. This water keeps going around 
and around in what we call the water cycle or the hydrologic cycle. 
Water continuously cycles between the oceans, atmosphere, land, 
and organisms, as illustrated in Figure 6.7. A  change in temperature,  
heating, and cooling, is the main driving force in the water cycle, 
causing a change in the state of water as water vapour (gas), ice or 
snow (solid), and liquid water. Among the many processes involved in 
the water cycle, the most important are: evaporation, transpiration, 
condensation, precipitation, and runoff.
The water cycle is sun driven process. It is solar heating that helps the 
cycle to start with evaporation. Evaporation of water from the earth 
and surface of the leaf by transpiration rises in the atmosphere in the 
form of water vapor. Then,   the water vapor cools and condenses in 
the atmosphere into rain or snow, and falls again to the earth’s surface 
as precipitation (Rainfall or snowfall). The water falling on earth 
through surface run off collects in rivers, lakes, soil, and soft rocks, 
where some water is taken up by plant roots and much of it flows into 
oceans and also infiltrate the soil and accumulated as ground water. 
The surface water by evaporation and evapotranspiration will restart 
the cycle.  What happens during the water cycle?
160
Grade 10 Biology Unit 6: Ecological Interactions                  Water accumulated in the ground can come to the surface as a 
spring or stream. Groundwater can also be pumped out for different 
purposes such as drinking and irrigation and join the water cycle by 
surface evaporation. 
 
Figure 6.7 Water cycle
Activity 6.6. Group Work
Title: How does the water cycle work?
Materials Needed:  Large glass beaker (100ml), Smaller glass beaker (50ml),  Water, Plastic cover, string 
or Large rubber-band
Procedure: 
• Place the small glass beaker at the centre of the larger glass beaker.
•   Fill the large glass beaker with water about 2/3rd of the way up the small beaker (do not put water 
inside the small beaker). 
•  Cover the large glass beaker with a plastic cover and either tie it with string or put a large rubber 
band around it to secure the plastic cover.
• Place the set up outside in a sunny area for a few hours. 
 After a few hours observe what happens to the plastic cover and look if there is water inside the small 
beaker.  Key questions: 
1.  What did you observe on the plastic cover?
2.  What is the process that enabled water particles to move up towards the plastic cover?
3.   What process is demonstrated when the water drops are getting too heavy and falling back to small 
glass beaker?
161
Grade 10 Biology Unit 6: Ecological Interactions                   6.2.2 Carbon cycle 
The air around us is composed of many different gases including 
oxygen, carbon dioxide, nitrogen and inert gases. Oxygen and 
carbon dioxide, in particular are important for the survival of living 
organisms. The amount of these gases is maintained in the atmosphere 
by photosynthesis and cellular respiration. 
As depicted in Figure 6.8, the amount of carbon in the atmosphere is 
maintained by process that continuously takes it from the atmosphere 
and various processes that release it back to the atmosphere. When 
green plants undergo the process of photosynthesis to make their food 
they absorb carbon dioxide from the air. The carbon element stored 
in the plant is transferred to animals that eat the plant. When plants 
and animals die their dead bodies are decomposed and release carbon 
dioxide back to the air due to the action of bacteria and fungi in the 
soil. In addition all living organisms including plants and animals 
release carbon dioxide through respiration in their entire life time. 
Over a period of long time dead bodies of organisms become fossil 
fuel which can be used by factories, power stations and vehicles. The 
combustion or burning of fossil fuel also releases carbon dioxide into 
the air. 
 
Figure 6.8. The carbon cycle 
Though CO2 is a natural part of Earth’s atmosphere,  humans produce 
more of it every year, and that’s changing our climate. Its atmospheric 
concentrations has significantly increased since the Industrial 
Revolution (late 18th centuary). Burning of the fossil fuels (coal, oil, What happens during 
carbon cycle?
How do you link 
carbondioxide  to  climate 
change?
162
Grade 10 Biology Unit 6: Ecological Interactions                  natural gas) and wood for energy are the major sources. Atmospheric 
CO2 acts like a heat-trapping blanket, absorbing the heat and holding 
it in, causing global warming. Global warming is a rise in the overall 
temperature of the earth’s surface. There are  also other heat-trapping 
gases (Greenhouse gases) in the atmosphere (methane and nitrous 
oxide), but CO2 is the most important one.  Thus, adition of excessive 
CO2 in to the atmosphere due to human activity is  the root cause of 
climate change. 
Photosynthesis and cellular respiration are the major processes 
that maintain the balance of oxygen and carbon dioxide in the 
atmosphere 
Photosynthesis is the exact reverse of aerobic respiration. The 
reactant for photosynthesis is the product of respiration and vice 
versa  as shown below
 CO2 + H2O                         C6H12O6+ O2
( Food )  Photosynthesis 
Respiration 
While photosynthesis occurs in the chloroplast of the leaf cell, 
aerobic cellular respiration takes place in the mitochondrion of a 
cell of aerobic organisms. Attention
ACTIVITY 6.7   Group Discussion   
Direction
In a group of four students (two pairs of neighbouring students) discuss and attempt the question 
below.
• How do illegal logging (cutting trees) 
and forest burning interferes in the 
carbon-oxygen cycle? How can this 
be related to climate change such as 
global warming? Why do we say the 
water cycle is a sun driven process?
• In small group , carefully look at the 
summary chart   below . Discuss the  
ways suggested to human interference  
with the carbon – oxygen cycle. Select 
at least two ways  mentioned in the  
chart , elaborate  and write a short 
group report to present in class
163
Grade 10 Biology Unit 6: Ecological Interactions                   6.2.3 Nitrogen cycle 
You have learned that proteins are made up of the elements C, H, O, 
N and S.  You also know that the immediate result of photosynthesis 
is carbohydrate (glucose), which consists of C, H, and O which is 
transformed to protein upon the addition of nitrogen. Nitrogen is 
available to the plant from the soil through the nitrogen cycle.
Figure 6.9. The Nitrogen cycle 
As shown in Figure 6.9  the nitrogen cycle is a repeating pathway of 
processes during which nitrogen in different forms moves through both 
biotic ( plants, animals, bacteria and fungi) and abiotic ( atmosphere, 
soil, water ) components of the ecosystem.  The major processes 
involved in cycling nitrogen are: nitrogen fixation, ammonification, 
nitrification, assimilation and denitrification.  A brief description of 
these processes is given hereafter
1. Nitrogen fixation 
Nitrogen accounts for about 78% of the atmosphere. Most living or -
ganisms are unable to incorporate atmospheric nitrogen, N2, into 
their systems. To be usable, the N2 should be fixed into usable forms 
such as ammonia or nitrate.  Nitrogen fixation is the conversion of N2 
into ammonia either biologically (mediated by bacteria) or non-bio -
logically (atmospheric fixation by lightning and industrial fixation in 
the laboratory).  In this lesson, we will focus on the biological fixation 
of nitrogen. 
Based on the group of bacteria involved, the biological N2 fixation 
may be categorized into two:  
i) Symbiotic nitrogen  fixation and 
ii) Non – symbiotic fixation
What is nitrogen cycle? 
164
Grade 10 Biology Unit 6: Ecological Interactions                  i. Symbiotic Nitrogen Fixation 
This form of biological nitrogen fixation is carried out in the root 
nodules of leguminous plants (such as peas, beans, and peanuts) by the 
group of soil bacteria known as rhizobia. Rhizobia form a symbiotic 
association with leguminous plants and form the root nodules where 
N2 is reduced into ammonia (Figure 6.10). The nitrogen fixation 
reaction (conversion of N2) is catalyzed by an enzyme known as 
nitrogenase. 
The ammonium ions produced by this process are passed to the 
legume plant (assimilated) and used to synthesize amino acids- 
building units of protein.  
               N
2 + 8e- + 8H+ + 16ATP             2NH
3 + H
2+ 16ADP + 16Pi
Figure 6.10. Root nodules of legume plant 
It is well known that concentrations of carbon dioxide and other 
greenhouse gases in the atmosphere have increased since the 
beginning of the industrial era due to human activities. Among these 
gasses is nitrous oxide (N2O), an intermediate product of microbial 
denitrification in the nitrogen cycle.   The emission of N2O is one risk 
to global climate change because of its global warming potential (over 
300 times than carbon dioxide) and long atmospheric residence time.  
Excessive use of synthetic N fertilizer in the agricultural system is the 
major source of N2O emissions.  Biological N2 fixation by rhizobia 
could be an alternative source of fixed N to synthetic N fertilizer to 
improve or sustain agricultural productivity and at the same time 
mitigate emission of N2O to the atmosphere.
ii. Non - symbiotic nitrogen fixation 
This form of biological nitrogen fixation is carried out by free living 
soil bacteria (belonging to the genera Azotobacter and Klebsiella). 
These bacteria reduce nitrogen gas into ammonium ions, which can 
How are rhizobia  linked 
to global climate?
165
Grade 10 Biology Unit 6: Ecological Interactions                   either be used by plants or oxidized immediately into nitrates by ni -
trifying bacteria.                 
2. Nitrification 
This is a microbial process by which ammonia is sequentially oxi -
dized - converted first to nitrite and then to nitrate.
In the first step of nitrification, ammonia-oxidizing bacteria (belong -
ing mainly to the genus Nitrosomonas) oxidize ammonia to nitrite 
according to the following equation: 
                    NH3 +O2            NO2- + 3H+ + 2 e-
In the second step of nitrification, nitrite-oxidizing bacteria (mainly 
belonging to the genus Nitrobacter) oxidize nitrite to nitrate accord -
ing to the following equation
                            NO2- +O2           NO3- + 2H+ + 2 e-
3. Assimilation of ammonium and nitrate  by plant
Plants commonly absorb nitrogen in inorganic forms either as nitrate 
(NO3-) or as ammonium (NH4+). Plants preferentially take up the re -
duced ammonium (NH4+) rather than the oxidized nitrate (NO3-), be-
cause the energy expenditure for the NH4+ assimilation is much lower 
than for NO3-.
The mechanism of absorption of ionic forms of nitrogen is essentially 
similar to the mechanism involved in the uptake of other ions.  Like 
other nutrients, they can be absorbed by the root actively or passively, 
reach the root xylem and then transported to the stem and leaves of 
the plant. Both ammonium and nitrate assimilated by plants are used 
in the synthesis of several amino acids which in turn are polymerized 
into different proteins.
4. Ammonification
This is an essential step that converts reduced organic matter having 
amine group (of general formula R – NH2) present in the soil to re -
duced inorganic nitrogen (NH4+) through the action of microorgan -
isms. Ammonification is the last step of the nitrogen cycle involving 
an organic compound and is an intermediary step between depolym -
erization of large organic molecules and the nitrification process as 
presented hereunder.
Dead organic matter 
(Protein, Chitin, 
Peptidoglycan, 
and Nucleic acid) Depolymerization
Amino acid, Urea,
Amino sugar  and 
Nucleotide AmmonificationAmmonium
( NH4+)Nitrate
( NO3-)Nitrification
166
Grade 10 Biology Unit 6: Ecological Interactions                  5. Denitrification
The flow of atmospheric nitrogen (N2) and its various forms through 
soil, microorganism, plants and animals should involve a process of 
returning nitrogen (N2) to the atmosphere to maintain balance.  This 
process, called denitrification, converts nitrate to nitrogen gas (N2), 
thus removing bioavailable nitrogen and returning it to the atmosphere. 
Unlike nitrification, denitrification is an anaerobic process, occurring 
mostly in waterlogged soils that are anoxic (without oxygen), layers of 
sediments in lakes and oceans.
 
It is important to know that the biological processes of the nitrogen 
cycle is largely   mediated by  different microorganisms , mainly 
bacteria . This is summarized in the following table. epidermis    
Biological process Microorganisms involved
1. Nitrogen Fixation Nitrogen fixing bacteria living in legume 
root nodule  ( Rhizobium)
Nitrogen fixing bacteria living in soil  
(Azotobacter and Klebsella)
2.Nitrification Nitrifying bacteria ( Nirtrosomonas, Ni -
trobacter) 
3.Ammonification Ammonifying bacteria ( Aerobic and an -
aerobic bacteria, fungi)
4.Denitrification Denitrifying bacteria ( Pseudomonas, 
Thiobacillus, Micrococcus)
After studying the brief description of major 
steps in the nitrogen cycle as illustrated with 
Figure 6.9, complete the following mental map 
and label the processes represented by letters 
(A to E).Self Test
NO3- NO2- NO + N2O N2
167
Grade 10 Biology Unit 6: Ecological Interactions                   Nitrogen is the most important component in an organism in the 
form of DNA, RNA and proteins.  You know that DNA contains a 
unique genetic code to guide all activities in living organisms. Like a 
recipe book, it holds the instruction for making all the proteins, both 
structural and functional, in our bodies.
 
You already know that atmospheric nitrogen (N2) cannot be directly 
used by both plants and animals. Plants use nitrogen in the inorganic 
form as ammonium and nitrate and convert it to organic forms such 
as amino acids and proteins.  It is, thereafter, animals that feed on 
plants get the organic form and transform, use and store the organic 
form of nitrogen in their body.  Here, the different soil bacteria, like 
the nitrogen bacteria and nitrifying bacteria are absolutely essential 
to providing plants with ammonium and nitrate. Moreover, the 
ammonifying bacteria, decomposing dead organic matter, liberate 
ammonium. Thus, soil bacteria that plays a key role in cycling 
nitrogen increase soil fertility, which in turn results in increased plant 
growth and agricultural productivity. For instance, the nitrogen-
fixing bacteria can be used as biofertilizers due to their big capacity 
for fixing a huge amount of nitrogen increasing soil fertility without 
causing any harmful effect on aerial and soil environment. They help 
improve soil structure and serve as a continuous source of natural 
fertilizer without being leached easily. Why is cycling nitrogen 
important?
DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid)  is an organic compound of complex 
structure that is found in all prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells.  DNA 
codes genetic information for the transmission of inherited traits. 
DNA is key to life because it determines how a cell replicates and 
performs its various activities.
A DNA molecule is composed of a long chain of monomers, 
the nucleotides. Each nucleotide consists of a five carbon sugar 
(deoxyribose) to which is attached a phosphate group and a  
nitrogenous base ( contains nitrogen)
Functional proteins  perform different functions that play key role 
to life. These key roles can be : catalytic     (Eg. enzymes), Storage ( 
E.g albumin in egg, casein in milk) , transport ( E.g  haemoglobin 
transport oxygen), protective ( Eg. antibodies, blood clotting factors) 
.. etc
Structural protein,  unlike functional proteins, are involved in 
producing structures such as bones and muscles as well as cell 
membrane and skin that covers the cell and the external body 
respectively.Key terms
ACTIVITY 6.8  Think–Pair– 
Share  
Direction: With a friend 
sitting next to you 
• anticipate   and  point out 
what will happen to life 
or living things if there 
was no nitrogen  in the 
atmosphere 
• discuss  the importance 
of soil bacteria in cycling 
nitrogen  and comment 
on the misconception that 
bacteria are commonly  
taken as harmful  and 
dangerous  to human 
beings.How do you relate   nitrogen cycle, soil bacteria and soil 
fertility?
What is the role  of larger 
soil organisms  such as 
earthworms  ? 
168
Grade 10 Biology Unit 6: Ecological Interactions                  Earthworms are soil organisms that are visible to the naked eye 
(Figure 6.11). They are one of the major decomposers of organic 
matter. The mutual action of earthworms and microbes brings faster 
decomposition of organic matter, and enhance   cycling of nutrients 
thereby facilitating plant growth and crop productivity. Having an 
abundance of earthworm is a good indicator of fertile soil and ensure 
higher   agricultural yield As a result, earthworms are nicknamed as 
“Friends of farmers” .
 When earthworms move through the soil, they form tubular channel 
or burrows. These burrows improves soil structure, particularly   soil 
porosity which increases the amount of air and water holding capacity. 
From your lesson on seed germination, you have learned that air and 
water are essential for seed to break dormancy (resting stage) and 
start growth and development of seedling. . 
Figure 6.11. Earthworms – Larger soil organisms 
 
Bio-fertilizers are microbial preparations containing living cells of 
different microorganisms which have the ability to mobilize essen -
tial plant nutrients such as nitrogen and phosphorus in soil from 
unusable to usable form through biological processes.
Biofertilizers, being cost effective, non-toxic, and eco-friendly, serve 
as good substitute for expensive and harmful chemical fertilizers. 
They increase crop yield, ensure food security and sustainable agri -
culture. 
Vermicompost  or worm compost is   organic fertilizer obtained by 
using worms. These are  commonly earthworms that  decompose  
food scraps, dungs,  other wastes and dead organic  matter and fa -
cilitate nutrient recycling 
Farmers that use organic fertilizers  (Organic farmers) usually grow 
legumes such as peas and beans for dual purpose. First, they harvest 
the legumes as a crop as these plants are freely supplied with nitro -
gen fertilizer due to the nitrogen fixing bacteria in their root nod -
ules. After harvesting yield, the organic farmers grow a non-legume 
crops to take an advantage of all nitrogen fixed and accumulated in 
the soil and root of the legumes: none is lost in a crop. Key terms
169
Grade 10 Biology Unit 6: Ecological Interactions                   6.2.4. Phosphorus cycle 
Phosphorus, like nitrogen, is needed by organisms to build proteins. 
Moreover, it is an essential component of the nucleotides of DNA, 
which is key for life.   Phosphorous is also needed in the synthesis of 
ATP, known as the energy currency of a cell. Phosphorus is usually 
present in the form of phosphate ions in soil and rock. 
As illustrated in Figure 6.12 cycling of phosphorus can be summarized 
as follows
	 phosphate ions present in soil or water are  taken up by plants and 
aquatic algae  are converted to organic phosphate 
	 organic phosphate synthesized by the producers is  passed along 
food chains to various consumers or feeders.
	 dead bodies of plants and animals are decomposed by bacteria and 
fungi and phosphate ions are released from different compounds 
like phospholipids, ATP, DNA and returned to the soil and water 
bodies. Phosphate is also excreted from animals and aquatic 
organisms.
	 phosphate will enter the soil in the form of fertilizers obtained 
by mining phosphate rocks and applying them in agricultural 
lands to boost crop yield. Phosphate fertilizer from farmlands can 
be leached by rainfall, reach the nearby water bodies and cause 
eutrophication.  
 ACTIVITY 6. 9  Homework  
Direction
Collect information from 
books about crop rotation. 
Then, prepare brief note 
and show why farmers use 
crop rotation and how they 
practice it. How is phosphorus recycled?
Figure 6.12. Phosphorous cycle 
170
Grade 10 Biology Unit 6: Ecological Interactions                  	 The Earth obtains energy which is trapped by plants for 
photosynthesis and transferred to animals that feed on them. 
	 A food chain is a unidirectional energy flow from the sun to 
producer and then to a series of consumers.  
	 Food web is interconnected food chains that make interwoven 
or web-like structures where energy flows in different directions 
(multidirectional) from producers to different consumers. 
	 The order of receiving solar energy is known as trophic level 
in that plants (producers) are at the First trophic level and 
animals that feed on plants will be at the Second trophic level 
or First feeding level and so on.
	 The flow of energy at each trophic level in a particular 
ecosystem can be shown using an ecological pyramid. 
	 The ecological pyramid can be a pyramid of energy, number 
and biomass. 
	 As energy is successively decreasing as it is transferred from one 
level to another level the pyramid of energy is always upright.  
As a result, the number of trophic where energy transferred is 
sufficient to sustain life will be limited from 4 to 5. ACTIVITY 6.10   Group work   
Direction
Discuss in a small group and prepare a short report on the danger of 
agrochemicals (fertilizers and pesticides) released from farmlands 
to the nearby water body, such as lakes or reservoirs.
ATP , abbreviation for Adenosine, is the immediate source of energy 
(instantly liberates energy) needed for various activities of a cell.  
Energy released during cellular respiration is harvested and stored as 
ATP.
Eutrophication  is undesirable excessive growth of aquatic plants 
(hydrophytes or macrophysics) and massive growth of algae (algal 
bloom). It is induced by leaching of fertilizers (rich in nitrogen and 
phosphorus from nearby farmlands or water loaded
Biofertilizers , being cost effective, non toxic , and eco – friendly 
, serve as good substitute for expensive and harmful chemical 
fertilizers. They increase crop yield ,  ensure  food security  and 
sustainable agriculture. Key terms
Unit Summary 
171
Grade 10 Biology Unit 6: Ecological Interactions                   	Ecological pyramid of number and biomass, depending on the particular ecosystem and food 
chain, pyramid of number and biomass can be upright or inverted. 
	Materials in an ecosystem are found in a limited amount and the same nutrients are continuously 
re-used, over and over again. This is what we call the cycle of materials.
	The most important cycle of  materials in an ecosystem include: water,  carbon -oxygen  cycle, 
nitrogen and phosphorus cycles
	Water (hydrologic) cycle  is a change in the state of water as water vapour (gas), ice or snow 
(solid) and liquid water is driven by solar heating and mainly due to change in temperature. 
	Among  the many processes involved in the water cycle, the most important are: evaporation, 
transpiration, condensation, precipitation and  runoff
	The carbon cycle maintains the amount of carbon in the atmosphere by process (es) that 
continuously take it from the atmosphere and release it back to the atmosphere. 
	 In cycling carbon, atmospheric carbon dioxide is continuously taken by plants as raw material 
for photosynthesis and the uptake is balanced by respiration, decomposition and combustion, all 
of which release carbon dioxide back to the atmosphere. 
	As opposed to the carbon cycle, in the oxygen cycle,  where oxygen  is continuously taken  
from the atmosphere by  processes like respiration, decomposition, combustion  and rusting     is   
balanced by photosynthesis  which releases  it back to the air 
	The nitrogen cycle is a repeating pathway of processes during which nitrogen in different 
forms moves through both biotic (plants, animals, bacteria and fungi) and abiotic (atmosphere, 
soil, water) components of the ecosystem. 
	 The major processes involved in cycling nitrogen are nitrogen fixation, ammonification, 
nitrification, assimilation, denitrification.
	The phosphorus cycle is mainly the transfer of phosphate ions from the soil, water and rock 
to plants and aquatic algae, first converted to organic phosphate in the producers and transferred 
to consumers through the food chain.  Phosphate ions are released from consumers through their 
excreta and as their dead bodies are decomposed by soil bacteria and fungi. 
172
Grade 10 Biology Unit 6: Ecological Interactions                   
I.  True – False items: Say “True” or “False” for the following statements on your exercise 
book. 
1.  There is more energy at the third trophic level than at the second trophic level.
2.  Ammonium is more preferred by plants than nitrate  
3.  Plants can release as well as take carbon to and from the atmosphere 
4.  Denitrifying bacteria are aerobic
 5. It is food web, not food chain that actually exists in ecosystem 
II.   Multiple-choice items: Choose the correct answer from A – D and write on you exercise 
book. 
1.      In the food chain:  Grass – rat – snake – Eagle, the position of Snake is at .................. feeding  
level and ........................... trophic level 
         A) 3, 2        B) 3, 4       C) 4, 3    D )  2, 3
 2.  If the producers in the ecological pyramid have a total of 70, 000 Kcal of energy, which of the 
following will be true 
A) The secondary consumers would have a total of 7 Kcal energy 
B) The primary consumers would have a total of 7000 Kcal energy
C) The secondary consumers would have a total of 70 Kcal energy
D) The tertiary consumers would have a total of 700 Kcal energy
3.  The biomass of an ecosystem is 
A) The total energy of living and non – living organisms in an ecosystem 
B) The total mass of living organisms in an ecosystem 
C) The total energy of living organisms in an ecosystem 
D) The total mass of living and non – living matter in an ecosystem 
4. In nitrogen fixation, nitrogen combines with 
    A) Carbon      B) Hydrogen     C) Oxygen   D) Water 
5.  What is the correct term for rising water vapour meeting colder air and turning back in to 
water droplets?
   A) Condensation   B) Dehydration    C) Evaporation   D) Precipitation Review Questions
173
Grade 10 Biology Unit 6: Ecological Interactions                   III. Matching items: Match the terms under “Column B” with description under  “Column 
A”
Column A Column B
1.  Is the process by which the protein in the waste matter, dead plants 
or animals is converted to ammonia Ammonification 
2. Carbon dioxide is the by-product of this biological process  Condensation  
3. The position of an organism in an order of receiving solar energy Denitrification
4. This process converts atmospheric nitrogen into usable form. Evaporation 
5. The position of an organism in an order of who eats whom Feeding level 
6. This contributes to the return of vapour  to the atmosphere  Nitrogen fixation 
Photosynthesis
Respiration 
Trophic level
      IV. Short Answer Items 
1.  Why is it unusual for a large number of organisms to be present at the top of an ecological 
pyramid?
2. How do plants get nitrogen?
3.  List down the advantages of organic fertilizers such as dead bodies and waste products of 
animals as compared to chemical fertilizers. 
4. What is the difference between forest clearing (cutting trees) and forest burning in terms of: 
a) carbon dioxide concentration in the atmosphere  
b) effect on global warming 
174
Grade 10 Biology 