                  
FEDERAL DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF ETHIOPIA 
MINISTRY OF EDUCATION
CHEMISTRY
STUDENT TEXTBOOK
GRADE 9
Chemistry Medicine
Food 
ProductionAgriculture
Building 
Construction
 Bonding
Measurments
This textbook is the property of your school.
Take good care not to damage or lose it.
Here are 10 ideas to help take care of the book:
1. Cover the book with protective material, such as 
plastic, old newspapers or magazines.
2. Always keep the book in a clean dry place.
3. Be sure your hands are clean when you use the 
book.
4. Do not write on the cover or inside pages.
5. Use a piece of paper or cardboard as a bookmark.
6. Never tear or cut out any pictures or pages.
7. Repair any torn pages with paste or tape.
8. Pack the book carefully when you place it in your 
school bag.
9. Handle the book with care when passing it to 
another person.
10. When	using	a	new	book	for	the	fi	rst	time,	lay	it	
on its back. Open only a few pages at a time. 
Press lightly along the bound edge as you turn the 
pages. This will keep the cover in good condition.Students
                  FEDERAL DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF ETHIOPIA 
MINISTRY OF EDUCATION
CHEMISTRY
STUDENT TEXTBOOK
GRADE 9
Chemistry Medicine
Food 
ProductionAgriculture
Building 
Construction
 Bonding
Measurments
CHEMISTRY
STUDENT TEXTBOOK
GRADE 9
Writers: 
 Sisay Tadesse (Ph.D.) 
 Tegene Tesfaye (Ph.D.) 
Editors:
 Tesfaye Semela (Ph.D.) (Curriculum Editor)
 Kenenisa Beresa (M.A.) (Language Editor)
 Ahmed Awel (M.Sc.) (Content Editor)
Illustrator:
 Abinet Tilahun (M.Sc.)
Designer: 
 Konno B. Hirbaye (M.Sc.) 
Evaluators:
 Legesse Adane (Ph.D.) (Reviewer)
 Nega Gichile (B.Sc., M.A.) (Evaluator)
	 Sefiw	Melesse	(M.Sc.)	(Evaluator)
 Tolessa Mergo (B.Sc., M.Sc.) (Evaluator)
   
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
Ministry of EducationHawassa University
IIIFirst Published xxxxx 2022 by the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia, Ministry 
of Education, under the General Education Quality Improvement Program for 
Equity (GEQIP-E) supported by the World Bank, UK’s Department for International 
Development/DFID-now merged with the Foreign, Common wealth and Development 
Office/FCDO,	 Finland	Ministry	for	Foreign	Affairs,	the	Royal	Norwegian	Embassy,	
United Nations Children’s Fund/UNICEF), the Global Partnership for Education (GPE), 
and Danish Ministry of Foreign Affairs, through a Multi Donor Trust Fund.
© 2022 b y the Federal D emocratic Republic of Ethiopia, Ministry of Education. All 
rights reserved. The moral rights of the author have been asserted. No part of this 
textbook reproduced, copied in a retrieval system or transmitted in any form or by 
any means including electronic, mechanical, magnetic, photocopying, recording or 
otherwise, without the prior written permission of the Ministry of Education or licensing 
in accordance with the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia as expressed in the 
Federal Negarit Gazeta , Proclamation No. 410/2004 - Copyright and Neighboring 
Rights Protection.
The Ministry  of Educat ion wishes to thank the many individuals, groups and other 
bodies involved – directly or indirectly – in publishing this Textbook. Special thanks 
are due to Hawassa University for their huge contribution in the development of this 
textbook in collaboration with Addis Ababa University, Bahir Dar University and 
Jimma University.
Copyrighted mat erials used by permission of their owners. If you are the owner of 
copyrighted material not cited or improperly cited, please contact the Ministry of 
Education,	Head	Office,	Arat	Kilo,	(P.O.Box	1367),	Addis	Ababa	Ethiopia.
Photo Credit:  
Printed by:
   PRINTING
P.O.Box:
  ETHIOPIA
Under Minis try of Education Contract no.:
ISBN:  978-999944-2-046-9  CONTENTS  
  Unit  1: CHEMISTRY AND ITS IMPORTANCE  1
1.1 Definition	and	Scope	of 	Chemistry	 2
1.2 Relationship between Chemistry and Other 
Natural Sciences  7
1.3 The Role Chemistry Plays in Production and in 
the Society 9
1.4 Some Common Chemical Industries in   
Ethiopia   12
Unit Summary  15
Review Exercise  16
  Unit  2: MEASUREMENTS AND SCIENTIFIC METHODS  19
2.1    Measurements and Units in Chemistry 20
2.2    Chemistry as Experimental Science  37
Unit Summary  50
Review Exercise  50
  Unit  3: STRUCTURE OF THE ATOM  53
3.1   Historical Development of the Atomic   
Theories of Matter  54
3.2   Fundamental Laws of Chemical Reactions  58
3.3   Atomic Theory  66
3.4   Discoveries of Fundamental Subatomic  
Particles and the Atomic Nucleus  71
3.5   Composition of an Atom and the Isotopes  87
Unit Summary  103
Review Exercise  107
IVV  
  Unit  4: PERIODIC CLASSIFICATION OF ELEMENTS  111
4.1   Historical Development of Periodic  
Classification	of 	the	Elements		 113
4.2   Mendleev’s	Classification	of 	the	Elements		 116
4.3   The Modern Periodic Table   120
4.4   The Major Trends in the Periodic Table  128
    Unit Summary  140
 Review Exercise  141
  Unit  5: CHEMICAL BONDING  143
5.1   Chemical Bonding  144
5.2   Ionic Bonding  146
5.3   Covalent Bonding  157
5.4   Metallic Bonding  171
Unit Summary  175
Review Exercise  178UNIT/gid00018/gid00018
Unit Outcomes 
After completing the unit, you will be able to
defi	ne	chemistry;	
describe	its’	scope;
discuss the relationships between chemistry with physics biology, medicine 
geology	and	other	subjects;
describe	the	application	of	chemistry	in	the	fi	eld	of	agriculture,	medicine,	
food	production	and	building	construction;
name some common chemical industries in Ethiopia and their product.CHEMISTRY AND ITS IMPORTANCE
Chemistr yGrade9 Chemistr yanditsImpor tance
Make groups and discuss on the following questions and 
present your discussion points to the class.
1. What do you think that the following materials are 
made of? 
the air you breath, 
the water you drink, 
the cloth you wear, and 
the food you eat?
2. Why is everything in this world changing from time 
to time?
3. Is it important to know the materials from which 
everything is made up of? Why?
4. Mention some of the materials you are using 
commonly. Did you know who manufactured them?Start-up Activity
Since chemistry is so fundamental to our world, it plays a role in everyone’s lives and 
touches almost every aspect of our existence in some way. Chemistry is essential for 
meeting our basic needs such as food, clothing, shelter, health, energy, and clean air, 
water, and soil. The question is how?
In this unit, the	defi	nition	and	the	scope	of	chemistry,	the	relationship	between chemistry 
and other natural sciences, the role it plays in production and in the society, and some 
common chemical industries in Ethiopia are presented thoroughly.
1.1 Deﬁ  nition and Scope of Chemistry 
In this section tw o aspect of chemistry are going	to	be	dealt	with.	The	fi	rst	is	defi	nition	
of chemistry which will be followed by the scope of chemistry. We shall begin by 
defi	ning	chemistry	fi	rst.	
1.1.1 Deﬁ  nition  of Chemistry
At	the	end	of	this	section,	you	will	be	able	to	defi	ne	chemistry.
Students, form a group of three or four and discuss the 
question given below. Present your discussion points to the 
class when asked by your teacher.
1. Did you know what the composition of the salt you are 
adding to your meal is?
23Chemistr yGrade9 Chemistr yanditsImpor tance
2. What do you think will happen to the sugar crystals 
when you add a teaspoon of it in a cup of tea and 
stir it?
3. How can you distinguish table salt from sugar?
4. What happens to the wood when you burn it?Activity 1.1 
Chemistry is the science that deals with the properties, composition, and structure 
of substances (elements and compounds), the transformations they undergo, and the 
energy that is released or absorbed during these processes. 
A substance  is a particular kind of matter with unif orm properties. Example, gold, 
silver, water, soap, table salt, etc ( Figure 1.1 ). 
Matter is a physical substance in general, that which occupies space and possesses rest 
mass, especially as distinct from energy. Example, book, pencil, television, stool, etc. 
The property of a substance is its attribute, quality, or characteristic. Every substance, 
in the universe in which we live, has its own properties by which we can distinguish it 
from other substances. This is because every substance has its own unique composition 
and structure. Example, water is a substance that has no color, taste, and shape. 
Composition	is	the	nature	of	something’s	ingredients	or	constituents;	how	a	whole	or	
mixture is made up. Example, table salt is chemically composed of the element sodium 
and chlorine. The stainless-steel spoons are solid solution (alloy) of chromium, carbon 
and other elements. 
The arrangement and relationships between the parts or elements of something 
complex is known as its structure . Example, the school buildings are made up of roof, 
ceiling,	doors,	windows,	walls,	and	ﬂ	oor	arranged	in	a	certain	order.	The	arrangement	
of each of these parts are known as the structure of the school building.
  
   
   
 Salt    Sulphur   Gold  Silver
Figure 1.1  Substances around us.
Every substance in our environment is continuously changing from time to time due to 
both external and internal forces. Due to this change, it transforms from one form into 
the other. The transformation of a substance is a marked change in form, nature, or 
appearance. These transformations are accompanied by energy changes. 4Chemistr yGrade9 Chemistr yanditsImpor tance
1. Defi	ne	the	term	chemistry.
2. Explain the meaning of the following phrases.
property of a substance
composition of a substance
structure of a substance 
transformation of a substanceExercise 1.1
1.1.2 Scope of Chemistry
At the end of this section, you will be able to explain the scope of chemistry.
Students, form groups of three or four. Discuss the 
following questions and present your discussion points to 
the class.
1. How do you clean: your cloth when it gets dirt, the 
dishes after eating meal, and your hand?
2. How does the butcher in your town measure the weight 
of beef before selling it?
3. Do you know how the clothes and shoes you wear, the 
tyres of automobiles, the different medicines you take 
when you are ill, and the glasses in the windows of 
your house are made?
4. What happens to the food in your body, after you 
ate it?  Activity 1.2 
The study of modern chemistry has many branches, but can generally be broken down 
into	fi	ve	main	disciplines,	or	areas	of	study:
i. Physical chemistry: Physical chemistry is the study of macroscopic properties, 
atomic properties, and phenomena in chemical systems. A physical chemist may 
study such things as the rates of chemical reactions, the energy transfers that occur 
in reactions, or the physical structure of materials at the molecular level.
ii. Organic chemistry: Organic chemistry is the study of substances containing 
carbon. Carbon is one of the most abundant elements on Earth and is capable 
of forming a tremendously vast number of chemicals (over twenty million so far). 
Most of the chemicals found in all living organisms are based on carbon.5Chemistr yGrade9 Chemistr yanditsImpor tance
iii. Inorganic chemistry:  Inorganic chemistry is the study of substances that, in general, 
are not primarily based on carbon. Inorganic chemicals are commonly found in 
rocks and minerals. One current important area of inorganic chemistry deals 
with the design and properties of materials involved in energy and information 
technology.
iv. Analy tical chemistry: Analytical chemistry is the study of the composition of 
matter. It focuses on separating, identifying, and quantifying chemicals in samples 
of matter. An analytical chemist may use complex instruments to analyze an 
unknown material in order to determine its various components.
v. Bioch emistry:  Biochemistry is the study of chemical processes that occur in 
living things. Research may cover anything from basic cellular processes up to 
understanding disease states so that better treatments can be developed.
All of the aforementioned disciplines of Chemistry are highly engaged in taking 
measurements, making observations, and using them to come to conclusions. Chemistry 
is about looking for patterns in the way substances behave. Because living and non-
living things are made of matter Chemistry affects all aspects of life and most natural 
events. The scope of Chemistry can be extended to explaining the natural world, 
preparing people for career opportunities, and producing informed patriot citizens. 
The scope of chemistry includes agriculture, medicine food production, and building 
construction (Figure 1.2 ). 
Figure 1.2 Some chemical products. 
Chemistry, however, is not only involved in providing useful substances in the 
areas of development and technology, but it can also result in very dangerous 
substances that can negatively affect human being’s life and the environment 
(eg.	 ﬂ	uorochloro	 hydrocarbons,	 oxides	 of	 nitrogen,	 carbon,	 and	 sulphur).	6Chemistr yGrade9 Chemistr yanditsImpor tance
Provide correct answer for the following questions.
1. List down examples of chemicals or chemical products that are used in the 
following areas:
Agriculture
Medicine
Food production
Building construction
Hint: Refer Figure 1.2  above.
2. Search on the internet, and write down some of the problems caused by 
dangerous chemicals affecting the environment.
3. Which	of	the	problems	you	fi	nd	in	question	#2	above	are	observed	in	your	
locality?
4. What do you think is the solution to the problem(s)? Remember that you are 
an Ethiopian citizen, and have the responsibility of protecting the nation from 
the problems caused due to chemical substances.Exercise 1.2
1.2 Relationship Between Chemistry and Other Natural Sciences
At the end of this section, you will be able to discuss the relationship of chemistry 
with physics, biology, medicine, geology and other subjects.
Students, form groups of three or four, and discuss the 
following questions. Then, present your discussion points to 
the class, when asked by your teacher.
1. List down the subjects that are categorized under 
natural science.
2. In biology class you may studied about photosynthesis. 
Is it possible to explain photosynthesis without having 
the knowledge of a chemical reaction? Reason out 
why? Activity 1.3 
Chemistry is one branch of science. Science is the process by which we learn about 
the natural universe by observing, testing, and then generating models that explain 
our observations. Because the physical universe is so vast, there are many different 
branches of science ( Figure 1.3 ). Thus, biology is the study of living things, and geology 
is the study of rocks and the earth. Physics is the branch of science concerned with the 
nature and properties of matter and energy. 7Chemistr yGrade9 Chemistr yanditsImpor tance
Figure 1.3 The relationships between natural sciences and chemistry.
Although we divide science into	different	fi	elds,	there	is	much	overlap	among	them.	
For	example,	some	biologists	and	chemists	work	in	both	fi	elds	so	much	that	their	work	
is called Biochemistry . Biochemistry is the study of the chemical processes occurring in 
living	matter.	To	give	you	a	specifi	c	example,	there	are	chemists	who	are	working	on	
the isolation, characterization and biological activities of medicinal plants. Similarly, 
Geology	and	Chemistry	overlap	in	the	fi	eld	called	 Geochemistry . Geochemistry is 
defi	ned	as	the	study	of	the	processes	that	control	the	abundance,	composition,	and	
distribution of chemical compounds and isotopes in geologic environments. Chemistry 
and Physics overlap in the areas of atomic and small molecule properties. Both of 
them deal with matter and energy.
Physical chemistry is the branch of chemistry concerned with the application of the 
techniques and theories of physics to the study of chemical systems. Chemical physics is 
a sub discipline of chemistry and physics that investigates physicochemical phenomena 
using	techniques	from	atomic	and	molecular	physics	and	condensed	matter	physics;	
it is the branch of physics that studies chemical processes from the point of view of 
physics. Chemistry and Medicine are related in the area of Medicinal chemistry .  
Figure 1.3  shows how many of	the	individual	fi	elds	of	science	are	related.	At	some	
level,	all	of	these	fi	elds	depend	on	the	matter	as	they	all	involve	‘stuff’.	Because	of	
this, chemistry has been called the ‘central	science’ linking them all together.
Provide correct answer the following questions.
1. What aspects of nature are studied in
Physics?
Biology?
Geology?Geochemistry?
Biochemistry?
Physical chemistry?
2. What are the regions of an overlap between
Chemistry and biology?
Chemistry and physics?Chemistry and geology?Exercise 1.3
8Chemistr yGrade9 Chemistr yanditsImpor tance
1.3 The Role Chemistry Plays in Production and in the Society
At the end of this section, you will  be able to describe the application of chemistry in 
the	fi	eld	of	agriculture,	medicine,	food	production	and	building	construction.	
Students, form groups of two or three and discuss the 
questions below. Present your discussion points to the class 
when asked by your teacher.
1. What are the common types of fertilizers the Ethiopian 
farmers employ to increase their crop productivity?
2. Give some examples of household materials that are 
used	for	cleaning,	baking	‘diffo	dabbo’,	disinfecting	
salad, preserving raw meat, and hair treatment.
3. What types of medications (traditional and modern) 
are used to treat the various diseases you know?
4. What are the common types of fuels that are sold in 
the gas stations?  Activity 1.4 
There are many instances in your everyday life that involves the knowledge of 
chemistry, its applications, and its rules. Let us look at some of them one by one.
A. Agriculture
The study of chemistry has brought the world with chemical fertilizers such as calcium 
super phosphate, urea, ammonium sulphate, and sodium nitrate. These chemicals 
have assisted greatly in increasing the yield of fruits, vegetables, and other crops 
(Figure 1.4). Chemistry has been effective in the manufacture of pesticides, which 
have lessened the crop damage. Depending on the targeted pest, pesticides include 
fungicides, herbicides, and insecticides. Thus, we can supply to the ever-growing 
demand for food. Chemistry has also an important role in the manufacturing of better-
quality plastic pipes for irrigation, and is commonly used in farming. This has massively 
increased irrigation resulting in a better climate in which the crops grow.
B. Food Production
Other than its great contribution in the production of different agricultural products, 
chemistry has led to the discovery of different kinds of food preservatives. These 
chemicals have greatly assisted to preserve food products for a longer period. It has 
given methods to test the presence of adulterants which ensure the supply of pure 
foodstuff.	Consumers	have	benefi	ted	from	new	technologies	that	have	increased	their	
food’s	availability,	appearance,	nutritional	contents	and	ﬂ	avor.	A	local	example	of	
food processing and keeping it for a longer period of time is the preservation of raw 
meat “ ቋንጣ”.9Chemistr yGrade9 Chemistr yanditsImpor tance
Figure 1.4  Agricultural products.
  Activity 1.5 Students, form groups of two or three and discuss the 
questions below. Present your discussion points to the class 
when asked by your teacher.
1. What are the common pests that damage crops in 
your locality?
2. What are the common herbs that reduce the production 
of food in your locality?
3. What are the commercial and traditional pesticides 
and herbicides used by the local farmers?
C. Medicine
Chemistry has provided mankind with a large number of life-saving medicines. We 
could	fi	nd	a	cure	for	dysentery	and	pneumonia	as	a	result	of	the	discovery	of	Sulphur	
drugs and penicillin. Besides this, life-saving drugs like cisplatin and Taxol are effective 
for cancer therapy, and AZT is used for AIDS victims. Although AZT does not cure HIV-
AIDS,	it	fi	ghts	the	multiplication	of	the	virus	thereby	prolonging	the	life	of	the	victim.	
HIV-AIDS as we know is a pandemic that has no curative medication. We need to 
prevent ourselves from this killer disease by being Abstain, Be faithful or reduce the 
number of your sex partners, and/or use a Condom. 10Chemistr yGrade9 Chemistr yanditsImpor tance
Common Drugs Chemistry Provided
Disinfectants Analgesics Anesthetics Antibiotics Antiseptics Tranquilizers
 Disinfectants: To	kill	the	microbe	present	in	toilets,	ﬂ	oors,	and	drains.	The	sanitizers	
we use for Covid-19 belong to this group. 
 Analgesics: An analgesic or painkiller is any member of the group of drugs used 
to achieve analgesia, relief from pain. 
 Anesthetics: Has made medical operations more and more effective via relieving 
pain. 
 Antibiotics: To control infection and cure diseases. 
 Antiseptics: To stop contamination of the wounds by bacteria. 
 Tranquillizers:  To reduce tension and bring about calm and peace to patients 
suffering from mental diseases. 
Activity 1.6 Students, form groups of two or three and discuss the 
questions below. Present your discussion points to the 
class when asked by your teacher.
1. Search on the Internet or from other sources 
and	 fi	nd	 examples	 of	 analgesics,	 antibiotics,	
tranquilizers, antiseptics, disinfectants, anesthetics, 
and insecticides.
2. Describe the composition and preparation of hand 
disinfectant or hand sanitizer.
D. Buildin g Construction  Materials
By providing building resources such as glass, steel and cement, chemistry helps in the 
construction of safer houses and multi-story structures. It also helps in the construction 
of long-lasting and durable dams and bridges. The best example here could be 
the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam (GERD) which is under construction in the 
Benishangul-Gumuz Region (Figure 1.5 ). The GERD is a 6,450 MW hydro power 
project nearing completion on the Blue Nile in Ethiopia, located about 30 km upstream 
of the border with Sudan. It will be the largest hydro power project in Africa. 11Chemistr yGrade9 Chemistr yanditsImpor tance
Figure 1.5 The Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam, Benishangul Gumuz Region, Ethiopia.
Figure 1.6  The role of chemistry in different sectors.
Provide correct answer for the following questions.
1. List down the role of chemistry in your locality. Draw a spider diagram of 
your own.
2. What problems, do you think, will be observed in the livelihood of the 
community in which you are living in the absence of enough knowledge of 
chemistry?
3. In your opinion, what further roles can chemistry play? Exercise 1.4
12Chemistr yGrade9 Chemistr yanditsImpor tance
1.4 Some Common Chemical Industries in Ethiopia 
At the end of this section, you will be ab le to name some common chemical industries  
found in Ethiopia and their products.
Activity 1.7 Students, make groups of how two or three and do 
the following activities. Present your answers to the 
class when asked by your teacher.
1. List down some of the house hold chemicals?
2. Do you know which industry is producing them?
3. List down the common chemical industries 
(enterprises) found in your locality or in the vicinity 
of your town. Which chemicals or chemical products 
are they producing?
Anindustry	is	defi	ned	as	an	economic	activity	concerned	with	the	processing	of	raw	
materials and the manufacture of goods in factories. It can also be interpreted as 
a group of companies that are linked based on their primary business activities. 
Individual companies are generally categorized into an industry based on their 
largest sources of revenue. The Ethiopian government is highly engaged in expanding 
industries in the past two decades. As part of this expansion several industrial parks 
have been under construction (Figure 1.7 ).
Figure 1.7  One of the industrial parks found in Ethiopia.
The chemical industries comprise the companies that manufacture inorganic- and 
organic-industrial chemicals, explosives, fragrances, agrochemicals, polymers and 
rubber, ceramic products, petrochemicals, oleochemicals (oils, fats, and waxes), and 
ﬂ	avors.	Central	to	the	world	economy,	it	converts	natural	resources	(oil,	natural	gas,	
air, water, metals, and minerals) into diverse products. They are further categorized 13Chemistr yGrade9 Chemistr yanditsImpor tance
into	industrial	inorganic	chemicals;	plastics,	materials,	and	synthetics;	drugs;	soap,	
cleaners,	and	toilet	goods;	paints	and	allied	products;	industrial	organic	chemicals;	
agricultural	chemicals;	and	miscellaneous	chemical	products.
The chemical products  mean products manufactured, processed, sold, or distributed 
by the company that are chemical substances, or that contained chemical substances. 
Three general classes of products are (1) basic chemicals such as alkalis, acids, organic 
chemicals, and salts (2) chemical products to be used in further manufactures such as 
plastic	materials,	synthetic	fi	bers,	pigments,	and	dry	colors,	and	(3)	fi	nished	chemical	
products	to	be	used	for	ultimate	consumption	such	as	cosmetics,	drugs,	and	soaps;	or	
to be used as materials or supplies in other industries such as fertilizers, paints, and 
explosives.
Currently, there are more than 51 medium and large-scale chemical and chemical 
products industries (enterprises) in Ethiopia (Table 1.1 ). These enterprises produce 
chemicals like aluminum sulphate, caustic soda, soda ash, carbon dioxide, bleaching 
chemicals, magnesium oxide, pesticides, and chemical products like soap and 
detergent, cement, paints, building materials, cosmetics, plastic, natural gum, candle, 
glass, sugar, tyre, pulp and paper, pharmaceuticals and tobacco. 
Table 1.1 Some of the large and medium scale chemical enterprises in Ethiopia.
No Name of the Enterprise Region Zone Wereda/ 
Sub-cityCity
1Chorra Gas & Chemical A.A N.S.L A.A
2Awash Melkasa Aluminum 
SulphateOromia East Shoa Adama Awash 
Melkasa
3Zeway Caustic Soda Oromia East Shoa Adamitulu Zeway
4Abijata Soda Ash Factory Oromia East Shoa Adamitulu Bulbula
5Moha Soft Drinks CO2
FactoryA.A Kirkos A.A
6Adola Magnesium Oxide 
FactoryOromia Guji Adolawoy Adolarede
7Adami-Tulu Pesticide Factory Oromia East Shoa Jido 
CombolchaAdami-
Tulu
8Nefas Silk Paints A.A Kirkos A.A
9Zemenawi Building Industries Oromia East Shoa Dukem Dukem
10Kadisco Chemical Industry A.A Akaki Kaliti A.A
11Mesfi	n	Tadesse	Soap	Factory Oromia Woliso Woliso
12Etab Laundry Soap Factory Sidama Hawassa Hawassa
13Get Eshet Detergent Oromia Adea 
LibenBishoftu14Chemistr yGrade9 Chemistr yanditsImpor tance
No Name of the Enterprise Region Zone Wereda/ 
Sub-cityCity
14Natural Gum Marketing 
EnterpriseAmhara Awi Awi
15Y.B Cosmetics A.A Burayu A.A
16Mekabe PLC (Cosmetics) A.A Lideta A.A
17Fanos Detergent Factory P.L.C Tigray Central Axum Axum
18Petera Soap Factory Oromia S.W. 
ShoaAlemgena Sebeta
19Teamco Hi-jaxs Soap Factory Oromia Burayu 
LiyuBurayu Burayu
Note:	A.A	stands	for	Addis	Ababa;	S.W	stands	for	South	West.
Other chemical product industries in Ethiopia. 
Cement (Mugher, Diredawa, Mesobo, Derba, Midroc, Dangote)
Sugar (Metehara, Wonji, Finchaa, Omokuraz)
Paper and pulp (Wonji)
Pharmaceuticals (Addis, Ethiopia, Adigrat) (Figure 1.10 )
Tyre (Horizon Addis Tyre)
Provide the correct answer for the following questions.
1. List the common names together with the chemical names, formula, and use 
of 10 household chemicals.
2. Browse	the	Internet	or	use	other	sources	and	fi	nd	out	10	other	household	
chemicals that are commonly used in different homes with their 
corresponding molecular formula, chemical names, and use.
3. List at least 15 chemical industries that are found in Ethiopia.Exercise 1.5
Project work 1.1
An industrial trip to the local industries
In this project, you will be able to visit a local chemical industry and present your 
observations to the class in group.
Students, your teacher will arrange an industrial tour so that you will practically 
observe	the	raw	materials,	the	chemical	processes	involved,	and	the	fi	nished	products	
in the industries that are located in your vicinity.  You are required to write a report 
and present it to the class in group.15Chemistr yGrade9 Chemistr yanditsImpor tance
Key Terms of the Unit
Analgesics  
Antibiotics
Anesthetics  
Antiseptics 
Chemistry 
Chemical products  
Chemical industry Composition  
Disinfectants 
Energy  
Industry 
Insecticides 
Matter Metallurgy 
Property 
Structure 
Substance   
Tranquilizers   
Unit Summary
Chemistry is the science that deals with the properties, compositions, and structures 
of substances, the transformations they undergo, and the energy that is released or 
absorbed during these processes.
The study of modern chemistry has many branches, but can generally be broken down 
into	fi	ve	main	disciplines,	or	areas	of	study:	Organic	chemistry,	Inorganic	chemistry,	
Physical chemistry, Analytic chemistry and Biochemistry. The scope of chemistry 
includes	production	and	processing	of	food;	improving	health	and	sanitation	facilities;	
environmental	protection;	provision	of	comfort,	pleasure	and	luxury;	advancement	and	
growth	of	industry;	and	weapon	production.	Because	living	and	non-living	things	are	
made up of matter, chemistry affects all aspects of life, and most natural events. The 
scope of chemistry can also be extended to explaining the natural world, preparing 
people for career opportunities, and producing informed patriot citizens.
Chemistry is the central science in the natural sciences. Being one of the basic sciences 
Chemistry is related to other natural sciences like Biology, Physics, Geology, Medicine, 
and Mathematics. Chemistry and Biology are related by the metabolic processes 
occurring inside living matter known as Biochemistry. Chemistry and Geology are 
related by the processes that control the abundance, composition, and distribution of 
chemical compounds and isotopes inside the crust of the earth known as Geochemistry. 
A sub-discipline of chemistry and physics that investigates physicochemical phenomena 
using techniques from atomic and molecular physics and condensed matter physics 
is known as Chemical physics. Chemistry and Medicine are related by a discipline 
that encloses the design, development, and synthesis of pharmaceutical drugs called 
Medicinal chemistry. Chemistry and Mathematics are related by the area of research 
engaged itself principally with the mathematical modelling of chemical phenomena 
called Mathematical chemistry. 
Since Chemistry is so fundamental to our world, it plays a role in everyone’s lives 
and touches almost every aspect of our existence in some way. Chemistry is essential 
for meeting our basic needs such as food, clothing, shelter, health, energy, and clean 
air, water, and soil. Chemistry can also help us comprehend, monitor, protect and 
recover the environment around us. Chemistry plays an important role in shaping 
the current state, and the predictions of the future state of the earth’s environment 16Chemistr yGrade9 Chemistr yanditsImpor tance
as a large number of agents that force the earth’s climate are chemically active. 
Chemistry, however, can also affect our environment negatively through production of 
toxic substances. The release of theses toxic substances into the environment results in 
climate change, the prime issue the world is facing currently. It is, therefore, high time 
to seek for solution to this problem by using our chemical knowledge.
Chemistry	plays	a	signifi	cant	role	in	the advancem ent and growth of several industries. 
There are several chemical and chemical products industries that produce a number 
of chemicals and chemical products. One way of categorizing them is into industrial 
inorganic	chemicals;	plastics,	materials,	and	synthetics;	drugs;	soap,	cleaners,	and	
toilet	goods;	paints	and	allied	products;	industrial	organic	chemicals;	agricultural	
chemicals;	and	miscellaneous	chemical	products.
The Ethiopian government is working hard in establishing Industrial Zones throughout 
the nation. Currently, there are more than 51 medium and large-scale chemical 
and chemical products industries (enterprises) in Ethiopia. These enterprises produce 
chemicals like aluminum sulphate, caustic soda, soda ash, carbon dioxide, bleaching 
chemicals,	 magnesium	 oxide,	 pesticides;	 and	 chemical	 products	 like	 soap	 and	
detergent, cement, paints, building materials, cosmetics, plastic, natural gum, candle, 
glass, sugar, tyre, pulp and paper, pharmaceuticals and tobacco.
Review Exercise
Part I: Basic level questions.
Identify	each	of	the	following	statements	as	‘True’	or	‘False’.	Give	your	reason(s)	for	
false statements.
1. Chemistry is a science that deals with the study of the way living things behave. 
2. Every substance in the universe, in which we live, has its own properties by which 
we can distinguish it from other substances.
3. The transformation of a substance is a marked change in form, nature, or 
appearance.
4. The study of chemistry involves only microscopic information.
5. Organic chemistry is the study of chemicals that are not based on carbon.
Part II: Intermediary level questions.
6. The property of a substance is its ___________ , ___________ or ____________.
7. ___________	is	the	nature	of	something’s	ingredients	or	constituents;	the	way	in	
which a whole or mixture is made up.
8. The arrangement of and relations between the parts or elements of something 
complex is known as its ___________.
9. ___________ is a power derived from the utilization of physical or chemical 
resources, especially to provide light and heat.
10. ___________ is the study of macroscopic properties, atomic properties, and 
phenomena in chemical systems.17Chemistr yGrade9 Chemistr yanditsImpor tance
11. ___________ is the study of the composition of matter.
Part III: Challenge level questions. 
12. Defi	ne	the	terms	industry,	chemical	industry,	and	chemical	products.
13. What are the roles chemistry played in production and society?
14. How does chemistry play a role in increasing comfort, pleasure, and luxuries?
15. Mention at least 10 chemical industries found in Ethiopia and their chemical 
products.
16. Which branch of chemistry has the highest scope? Why?
17. What	are	the	fi	ve	fi	elds	of	chemistry?
18. What will be the future efforts of chemistry?
19. What jobs can you do with chemistry?Chemistr yGrade9
18Chemistr yGrade9Chemistr yGrade9 Chemistr yGrade9
UNIT/gid00019/gid00019
Unit Outcomes 
After completing the unit, you will be able to
use	proper	SI	units;
identify	the	causes	of	uncertainty	in	measurement;
express the result of any calculation involving experimental data to the    
appropriate	number	of	decimal	places	or	signifi	cant	fi	gures;
apply	scientifi	c	methods	in	solving	problems;
demonstrate	an	understanding	of	experimental	skills	in	chemistry;
demonstrate a knowledge of basic laboratory apparatuses and  safety 
rules;
describe	scientifi	c	inquiry	skills	along	this	unit:	observing,	inferring,	
predicting, comparing & contrasting, communicating, analyzing, 
classifying, applying, theorizing, measuring, asking question, developing 
hypothesis, designing experiment, interpreting data, drawing conclusion, 
making generalizations and problem solving.MEASUREMENTS AND SCIENTIFIC METHODS
20Chemistr yGrade9 Measur ements andScientiﬁc Methods
2.1 Measurements and Units in Chemistry 
Learning competencies
At the end of this section, you should be able to
list	the	seven	SI	units	and	their	prefi	xes;
describe	the	seven	SI	units	and	their	prefi	xes;
write	the	names	and	symbols	of	derived	SI	units;
 use the factor label method for solving problems and making conversion of SI 
units;
describe	uncertainty	of	measurement;
 identify the digits that are certain and the ones that are uncertain given a 
number	representing	measurement;
identify	causes	of	uncertainty	in	measurement;
defi	ne	precision	and	accuracy;
estimate	the	precision	possible	for	any	instrument	they	use	in	the	laboratory;
explain	systematic	and	random	errors;
analyze		given	data	in	terms	of	precision	and	accuracy;
defi	ne	signifi	cant	fi	gures;
determine	the	number	of	signifi	cant	fi	gures	in	a	calculated	result;
use	the	scientifi	c	notation	in	writing	very	large	or	very	small	numbers.
Conduct	the	following	activity	and	present	your	fi	nding	to	
the class. 
1. In group, discuss and list down different traditional 
ways of measuring mass of solid and liquid substances 
sold in the market places in your area. 
2. Mention indigenous methods of measurements 
(length, mass, time, volume)Start-up Activity
Measurement is the comparison of a physical quantity to be measured with a unit of 
measurement	that	is,	with	a	fi	xed	standard	of	measurement.	On	a	centimeter	scale,	the	
centimeter unit is the standard of comparison. In traditional markets people buy and 
sell goods by estimating their size in traditional way or use traditional measurement 
method. Figure 2.1 shows traditional market and people exchanging goods by 
estimating their size using indigenous methods of measurements.21Chemistr yGrade9 Measur ements andScientiﬁc Methods
Figure 2.1  Traditional market.
The study of chemistry depends heavily on measurement. For instance, chemists 
use measurements to compare the properties of different substances and to assess 
changes resulting from an experiment. A number of common devices enable us to make 
simple	measurements	of	a	substance’s	properties:	The	meter	stick	measures	length;	the	
burette,	the	pipette,	the	graduated	cylinder,	and	the	volumetric	ﬂ	ask	measure	volume	
(see Figure 2.2);	the	balance	measures	mass;	the	thermometer	measures	temperature.	
The instruments illustrated  on Figure 2.2  provide measurements of macroscopic 
properties, which can be determined directly. Microscopic properties, on the atomic 
or molecular scale, must be determined by an indirect method. A measured quantity 
is usually written as a number with an appropriate unit. To say the distance between 
Addis Ababa and Hawassa by car along a certain route is 275 is meaningless. We 
must specify that the distance is 275 kilometers. In science, units are essential to state 
measurements correctly.22Chemistr yGrade9 Measur ements andScientiﬁc Methods
Figure 2.2  Some common measuring devices found in a chemistry laboratory.
Conduct	the	following	activity	and	present	your	fi	nding	to	
the class. 
a. Using thermometer with oC and oF scale measure your 
body temperature. Compare the results in oCwith  the 
result in oF.
b. What is the distance between Addis Ababa and your 
town (village) in kilometers?
c. Which basic SI units are appropriate to express the:
i. average room temperature, and
ii. time duration for the earth to have one rotation 
around its axis?   Activity 2.1
2.1.1 SI Units (The International System of Units)
For many years, scientists recorded measurements in metric units, which are related 
decimally, that is, by powers of 10. In 1960, however, the General Conference of 
Weights and Measures, the international authority on units, proposed a revised metric 23Chemistr yGrade9 Measur ements andScientiﬁc Methods
system called the International System of Units. 
Table 2.1  shows the seven SI base units. Measurements that we will utilize frequently in 
our study of chemistry include time, mass, volume, density, and temperature.
Table 2.1 SI Base Units.
Base Quantity Name of Unit Symbol
Length Meter m
Mass Kilogram kg
Time Second s
Electrical current Ampere A
Temperature Kelvin K
Amount of substance Mole mol
Luminous intensity Candela cd
2.1.2 Derived Un its
All other SI units of measurement can be derived from base units (called derived units). 
Table 2.2	shows	some	of	the	common	derived	units.	Once	base	units	have	been	defined	
for a system of measurement, you can derive other units from them. You do this by 
using	the	base	units	in	equations	that	define	other	physical	quantities.	For	example,	
area	is	defined	as	length	times	width.	Therefore,
 SI unit of area = (SI unit of length) × (SI unit of width)
From this, SI unit of area is meter × meter, or m2.	Similarly,	speed	is	defined	as	the	
rate	of	change	of	distance	with	time;	that	is,	speed	=	distance/time.	Consequently,
SI unit of speed =SI unit of distance 
       SI unit of �  me
The SI unit of speed is meters per second (that is, meters divided by seconds). The unit 
is symbolized m/s or m s-1. The unit of speed is an example of an SI derived unit, which 
is a unit derived by combining SI base units. Table 2.2  displays a number of derived 
units. Volume and density are discussed in this section.
Volume
Volume	is	defined	as	length	cubed	and	has	the	SI	unit	of	cubic	meter	(m3). This is too 
large a unit for normal laboratory work, so we use either cubic decimeters (dm3) or 
cubic centimeters (cm3, also written cc). Traditionally, chemists have used the liter (L), 
which is a unit of volume equal to a cubic decimeter. In fact, most laboratory glassware 
(Figure 2.2 ) is calibrated in liters or milliliters (1000 mL = 1 L). Because 1 dm equals 
10 cm, a cubic decimeter, or one liter, equals (10 cm)3 = 1000 cm3. Therefore, a 
milliliter equals a cubic centimeter. In summary,
  1 L = 1 dm3 and 1 mL = 1 cm3.24Chemistr yGrade9 Measur ements andScientiﬁc Methods
Table 2.2 Derived units.
Quantity Deﬁ  nition of Quantity SI Unit
Area Length squared m2
Volume Length cubed m3
Density Mass per unit volume kg/m3
Speed Distance traveled per unit time m/s
Acceleration Speed changed per unit time m/s2
Force Mass times acceleration of object kg.m/s2 (= newton, N)
Pressure Force per unit area kg/(m.s2)(= pascal,Pa)
Energy Force times distance traveled kg.m2/s2 (= joule,J)
Densi ty
The density of an object is its mass per unit volume. You can express this as 
  d = m 
         v 
where d is the density, m is the mass, and V is the volume. Suppose an object has a 
mass of 15.0 g and a volume of 10.0 cm3. Therefore, the density will be
 d = 15.0 g     = 1.50 g/cm3
        10.0 cm3
The density of the object is 1.50 g/cm3. 
Density is an important characteristic property of a material. Water, for example, has 
a density of 1.000 g/cm3 at 4 oC and a density of 0.998 g/cm3 at 20 oC. Lead has 
a density of 11.3 g/cm3 at 20 oC.
Density can also be useful in determining whether a substance is pure. Consider a gold 
bar whose purity is questioned. The metals likely to be mixed with gold, such as silver 
or copper, have lower densities than gold. Therefore, an adulterated (impure) gold 
bar can be expected to be far less dense than pure gold.
Example  2.1: Calculating the density of a substance 
A colorless liquid, used as a solvent (a liquid that dissolve other substances), is believed 
to be one of the following (Table 2.3):
Table 2.3 Density of different liquids.
Substance Density (in g/mL)
n-butyl alcohol 0.810
ethylene glycol 1.114
isopropyl alcohol 0.785
toluene 0.86625Chemistr yGrade9 Measur ements andScientiﬁc Methods
To identify the substance, Chaltu determined its density. By pouring a sample of the 
liquid into a graduated cylinder, she found that the volume was 35.1 mL. She also 
found that the sample weighed 30.5 g. What was the density of the liquid? What was 
the substance?
Solution
The	solution	to	this	problem	lies	in	fi	nding	the	density	of	the	unknown	substance.	Once	
the density of the unknown substance is known, you can compare it to the list of known 
substances presented in the problem and look for a match. Density is the relationship 
of the mass of a substance per volume of that substance. Expressed as an equation, 
density is the mass divided by the volume: d = m/V.
You substitute 30.5 g for the mass and35.1 mL for the volume into the equation.
  d = m  = 30.5 g   = 0.869 g/mL         v      35.1mL
The density of the liquid equals that of toluene (within experimental error).
Answer Check Alw ays be sure to report the density in the units used when performing 
the calculation. Density is not always reported in units of g/ml org/cm3,	for	example;	
gases are often reported with the units of g/L.
A piece of metal wire has a volume of 20.2 cm3 and a mass of 159 g. What 
is the density of the metal? We know that the metal is manganese, iron, or 
nickel, and these have densities of 7.21 g/cm3, 7.87 g/cm3, and 8.90 g/cm3, 
respectively. From which metal is the wire made?Exercise 2.1
Heat and Temperature
Temperature measures the intensity of heat, the “hotness” or “coldness” of a body. 
Heat	is	a	form	of	energy	that	always	ﬂ	ows	spontaneously	from	a	hotter	body	to	a	
colder body — never in the reverse direction.
Relationships among the three temperature scales are illustrated in Figure 2.4 . Between 
the freezing point of water and the boiling point of water, there are 100 steps (°C or 
Kelvins, respectively) on the Celsius and Kelvin scales. Thus, the “degree” is the same 
size on the Celsius and Kelvin scales. But every Kelvin temperature is 273.15 units 
above the corresponding Celsius temperature. The relationship between these two 
scales is as follows:
  K = 0C + 273.15 0C or 0C = K - 273.15026Chemistr yGrade9 Measur ements andScientiﬁc Methods
In the SI system, “degrees Kelvin” are abbreviated simply as K rather than °K and 
are called kelvins.
Any temperature change has the same numerical value whether expressed on the 
Celsius scale or on the Kelvin scale. For example, a change from 25°C to 59°C 
represents a change of 34 Celsius degrees. Converting these to the Kelvin scale, 
the same change is expressed as (273 + 25) = 298 K to (59 + 273) = 332 K, or a 
change of 34 kelvins.
Comparing the	Fahrenheit	and	Celsius	scales,	we	fi	nd	that	the	intervals	between	
the same reference points are 180 Fahrenheit degrees and 100 Celsius degrees, 
respectively. Thus, a Fahrenheit degree must be smaller than a Celsius degree. It 
takes 180 Fahrenheit degrees to cover the same temperature interval as 100 Celsius 
degrees. From this information, we can construct the unit factors for temperature 
changes:
   180 0F   
100 0C1.8 0C   
1.0 0F100 0C  
180 0F1.0 0C   
1.8 0For and or
But the starting points of the two scales are different, so we cannot convert a 
temperature on one scale to a temperature on the other just by multiplying by the unit 
factor. In converting from °F to °C, we must subtract 32 Fahrenheit degrees to reach 
the zero point on the Celsius scale ( Figure 2.3 ).
1.8 932 32
1.0 5oo
oo oo o
ooFFF xC F xC F
CC    =× +=×+      and ()()1.0 532 32
1.8 9oo
o oo oo
ooCCC xF F xF F
FF= −= −
Figure 2.3  The relationships among the Kelvin, Celsius (centigrade), and Fahrenheit 
temperature scales.27Chemistr yGrade9 Measur ements andScientiﬁc Methods
Example 2.2 : Temperature conversion
When the temperature reaches “100.°F in the shade,” it’s hot. What is this temperature 
on the Celsius scale?
Solution
We use the relationship ()1.0321.8o
o oo
oCC xF FF= −
to carry out the desired conversion. ( )1.0 1.0100 32 (68 ) 381.8 1.8oo
o oo o o
ooCCC FF F CFF= −= =
Temperature Conversion
When the absolute temperature is 400 K, what is the Fahrenheit temperature?Exercise 2.2
2.1.3 Common Preﬁ  xes Used in SI Units 
The	factor	expressed	as	a	factor	to	the	power	of	ten,	SI/	metric	prefi	x,	the	symbol	
used and the actual decimal number are tabulated in Table 2.4. They are widely 
used	and	are	easy	to	add	to	the	basic	units.	Like	metric	units,	SI	units	are	modifi	ed	in	
decimal	fashion	by	a	series	of	prefi	xes,	as	shown	in	 Table 2.4 . Measurements that we 
will utilize frequently in our study of chemistry include time, mass, volume, density, and 
temperature.
Table 2.4 SI/ Metric Units, Symbols and Numbers.
Factor Preﬁ  x Symbol  Decimal Example
1012Tera T 1,000,000,000,000 1 Terameter (Tm)=1×1012 m
109Giga G 1,000,000,000 1 Gigameter (Gm)= 1×109 m
106Mega M 1,000,000 1 Megameter (Mm)= 1×106 m
103Kilo k 1,000 1 kilometer (km)= 1×103 m
102Hecto h 100 1 hectometer (hm)= 1×102 m
101Deca da 10 1 decameter (dam)= 1×101 m
10-1Deci d 0.1 1 decimeter (dm)= 1×10-1 m
10-2Centi c 0.01 1 centimeter (cm)= 1×10-2 m
10-3milli- m 0.001 1 millymeter (mm)= 1×10-3 m
10-6Micro µ 0.000 001 1 micrometer (µm)= 1×10-6 m
10-9Nano n 0.000 000 001 1 nanometer (nm)= 1×10-9 m
10-12Pico p 0.000 000 000 001 1 picometer (pm)= 1×10-12 m28Chemistr yGrade9 Measur ements andScientiﬁc Methods
Examples of  SI preﬁ  xes
The	SI	prefi	xes/	metric	prefi	xes	are	easily	used	as	demonstrated	by	the	few	simple	
examples given below:
1 Megawatt = 1,000,000 watts
1 kilogram = 1,000 grams
1 µF = 1 microFarad = 1/1,000,000 Farad  
Along with these the abbreviations or symbols can also be used. For example, kV for 
kilovolts, kW for kilowatts, and km for kilometer. The other symbols or abbreviations 
can be used in exactly the same manner. 
2.1.4 Uncertainty in Measurements
Whenever you measure something, there is always some uncertainty. There are two 
categories of uncertainty: systematic and random. 
1. Systematic uncertainties are those which consistently cause the value to be too 
large or too small. Systematic uncertainties include such things as reaction time, 
inaccurate meter sticks, optical parallax and miscalibrated balances. In principle, 
systematic uncertainties can be eliminated if you know they exist. 
2. Random uncertainties are variations in the measurements that occur without a pre-
dictable pattern. If you make precise measurements, these uncertainties arise from 
the estimated part of the measurement. Random uncertainty can be reduced, but 
never eliminated. We need a technique to report the contribution.
The uncertainty shall rather be understood as an interval within which the result can be 
found with a given probability. Thus, the result will be within the interval but all values 
within the interval have the same probability to represent the result. 
Figure 2.4 Uncertainty in volume measurement using a measuring cylinder.29Chemistr yGrade9 Measur ements andScientiﬁc Methods
Conduct	the	following	activity	and	present	your	fi	nding	to	
the class. 
1. Make a chain of paper clips or other objects of 
uniform length. Then use a meter stick to measure a 
series of lengths on the chain. For example, measure 
sections containing one, two, three, etc., clips. Record 
your results and share them with your classmates.
2. Using laboratory scale, take several mass reading 
for one, two, three objects of uniform size. You can 
use	any	convenient	objects	you	fi	nd	in	the	laboratory.	
Record your results and discuss them in your group. 
Focus especially on the similarities and differences in 
your	measurement.	Did	you	all	fi	nd	the	same	reading	
for the same object? What do you think are the cause 
of the uncertainties, if any? Discuss the results with the 
rest of the class.   Activity 2.2
Calculating uncertainties 
There are several techniques that will produce an estimate of the uncertainty in the 
value of the mean. Since we are expecting students to produce an estimate of the 
uncertainty any suitable value that indicates half the range is acceptable. 
Example 2.3:  A student measures the diameter of a metal canister using a ruler 
graduated in mm and records these results: 
Diameter/mm
Reading 1 Reading 2 Reading 3 Mean
66 65 61 64
The uncertainty in the mean value (64 mm) can be calculated as follows:
a. Using the half range
The range of readings is 61 mm – 66 mm so half the range is used to determine the 
uncertainty. 
Uncertainty in the mean diameter = (66 mm – 61 mm)/2 = 2.5 mm
Therefore, the diameter of the metal canister is 64 mm ± 2.5 mm. 
Since a ruler graduated in mm could easily be read to ± 0.5 mm, it is acceptable to 
quote the uncertainty as ± 2.5 mm for this experiment. 
b. Using the reading furthest from the mean
In this case, the measurement of 61 mm is further from the average value than 66 mm 
therefore we can use this value to calculate the uncertainty in the mean.
Uncertainty in the mean diameter = 64 mm – 61 mm = 3 mm. 
Therefore, the diameter of the metal canister is 64 mm ± 3 mm.30Chemistr yGrade9 Measur ements andScientiﬁc Methods
c. Using the resolution of the instrument
This is used if a single reading is taken or if repeated readings have the same value. 
This is because there is an uncertainty in the measurement because the instrument used 
to take the measurement has its own limitations.  If the three readings obtained above 
were all 64 mm then the value of the diameter being measured lies somewhere between 
63.5 mm and 64.5 mm since a meter rule could easily be read to half a millimeter.  
In this case, the uncertainty in the diameter is 0.5 mm. Therefore, the diameter of the 
metal canister is 64 mm ± 0.5 mm. This also applies to digital instruments. An ammeter 
records currents to 0.1 A. A current of 0.36 A would be displayed as 0.4 A, and a 
current of 0.44 A would also be displayed as 0.4 A. The resolution of the instrument 
is 0.1 A but the uncertainty in a reading is 0.05 A.
The typical uncertainty of a top loading balance is 0.05 g. How would you report 
on weighing of 23.25 g made on this top loading balance? The result should be 
reported as 23.25 g ± 0.05 g. Such an item of data means that the correct reading 
lies between 23.20 g and 23.30 g. 
The uncertainty in a measurement can be expressed in two useful ways: 
a. as the absolute uncertainty in the last digit written
b. as the percent uncertainty calculated as follows
% uncertainty =absolute uncertainty× 100     measurement
% uncertainty = (0.05 g)/( 23.25 g) × 100 = 0.2%
Therefore the answer may be reported as:
Absolute uncertainty: 23.25 g ± 0.05 g
Percent uncertainty: 23.25 g ± 0.2%
Absolute uncertainty and percent uncertainty  in a single reading: Use the given 
uncertainty to calculate the % uncertainty in each of the following readings and 
report the result of measurement in terms of absolute uncertainty and percent 
uncertainty: 
a. A barometer reading of 723.5 torr. The absolute uncertainty is 0.1 torr
b. 2.75 g weighed on a top loading balance. The absolute uncertainty is 0.05 
g
c. 2.7413 g weighed on an analytical balance. The absolute uncertainty is 
0.0002 gExercise 2.3
31Chemistr yGrade9 Measur ements andScientiﬁc Methods
d. A temperature reading of 75.6 °C on a thermometer graduated to the 
nearest degree. The absolute uncertainty is 0.2 °C
e. 18.6 ml measured in 100 ml graduated cylinder. The absolute uncertainty 
is 0.4 mL
f. 43.7 ml measured in 100 ml graduated cylinder. The absolute uncertainty 
is 0.4 mL
2.1.5 Precision and Accuracy
Measurements may be accurate, meaning that the measured value is the same as the 
true	value;	they	may	be	precise,	meaning	that	multiple	measurements	give	nearly	
identical	values	(i.e.,	reproducible	results);	they	may	be	both	accurate	and	precise;	or	
they may be neither accurate nor precise. The goal of scientists is to obtain measured 
values that are both accurate and precise. 
If you repeat a particular measurement, you usually do not obtain precisely the same 
result, because each measurement is subject to experimental error. The measured 
values vary slightly from one another. Suppose you perform a series of identical 
measurements of a quantity. The term precision refers to the closeness of the set of 
values obtained from identical measurements of a quantity. Accuracy is a related 
term;	it	refers	to	the	closeness	of	a	single	measurement	to	its	true	value.
Example 2.4:  Precision and Accuracy
The archery targets in Figure 2.5 show marks that represent the results of four sets of 
measurements.	Which	target	shows;
a. a precise but inaccurate set of measurements?
b. an accurate but imprecise set of measurements?
c. a set of measurements that is both precise and accurate?
d. a set of measurements that is neither precise nor accurate?
Figure 2.5 The distribution of darts on a dart board showing the difference between 
precise and accurate.32Chemistr yGrade9 Measur ements andScientiﬁc Methods
Form groups, discuss and present your conclusion to 
the class
1. Mohammed measured the mass of a sample of 
gold using one balance and found 1.896 g. On 
a different balance, the same sample was found 
to have a mass of 1.125 g. Which measurement 
was	correct	the	fi	rst	or	the	second	measurement?	
Careful and repeated measurements made 
by Mohammed, including measurements on a 
calibrated third balance, showed the sample to 
have a mass of 1.895 g. The masses obtained 
from the three balances are in the Table 2.5:
Table 2.5 Mass measurement
Balance 1 Balance 2 Balance 3
1.896 g 1.125 g 1.893 g
1.895 g 1.158 g 1.895 g
1.894 g 1.067 g 1.895 g
Activity 2.3
a. A 2-carat diamond has a mass of 400.0 mg. When a jeweler repeatedly 
weighed a 2-carat diamond, he obtained measurements of 450.0 mg, 
459.0 mg, and 463.0 mg. Were the jeweler’s measurements accurate? 
Were they precise?
b. A single copper penny was tested three times to determine its composition. 
The	fi	rst	analysis	gave	a	composition	of	93.2%	zinc	and	2.8%	copper,	the	
second gave 92.9% zinc and 3.1% copper, and the third gave 93.5% zinc 
and 2.5% copper. The actual composition of the penny was 97.6% zinc and 
2.4% copper. Were the results accurate? Were they precise?Exercise 2.4
33Chemistr yGrade9 Measur ements andScientiﬁc Methods
2.1.6 Signiﬁ  cant Figures
Exact and measured numbers: Classify the following as 
exact or measured numbers and give explanation for 
your	classifi	cation	to	the	rest	of	the	class.
a. The distance between your home and school
b. Number of oranges in a sack
c. Number of aspirin tablet in a strip.
d. The volume of a glass of water.Activity 2.4
There	are	two	kinds	of	numbers.	Numbers	obtained	by	counting	or	from	defi	nitions	
are exact numbers. They are known to be absolutely accurate. For example, the exact 
number of people in a closed room can be counted, and there is no doubt about the 
number	of	people.	A	dozen	eggs	is	defi	ned	as	exactly	12	eggs,	no	more,	no	fewer	
(Figure 2.6 ).
(b) (a)
Figure 2.6	(a)	A	dozen	eggs	is	exactly	12	eggs.	(b)	A	specifi	c	swarm	of	honeybees	
contains	an	exact	number	of	live	bees	(but	it	would	be	diffi	cult	to	count	them,	and	any	
two swarms would be unlikely to contain the same exact number of bees).
Numbers obtained from measurements are not exact. Every measurement involves an 
estimate. For example, suppose you are asked to measure the length of this page 
to the nearest 0.1 mm. How do you do it? The smallest divisions (calibration lines) 
on a meter stick are 1 mm apart (see Figure 2.7). An attempt to measure to 0.1 mm 
requires estimation. If three different people measure the length of the page to 0.1 
mm, will they get the same answer? Probably not. We deal with this problem by using 
signifi	cant	fi	gures.34Chemistr yGrade9 Measur ements andScientiﬁc Methods
Figure 2.7  The relationship between inches and centimeters: 1 in. = 2.54 cm (exactly)
Except when all the numbers involved are integ ers (for example, in counting the number 
of students in a class), obtaining the exact value of the quantity under investigation 
is often impossible. For this reason, it is important to indicate the margin of error in 
a	measurement	by	clearly	indicating	the	number	of	signifi	cant	fi	gures,	which	are	the	
meaningful	digits	in	a	measured	or	calculated	quantity.	When	signifi	cant	fi	gures	are	
used, the last digit is understood to be uncertain. For example, we might measure the 
volume of a given amount of liquid using a graduated cylinder with a scale that gives 
an uncertainty of 1 mL in the measurement. If the volume is found to be 6 mL, then the 
actual volume is in the range of 5 mL to 7 mL. We represent the volume of the liquid as 
(6±1)	mL.	In	this	case,	there	is	only	one	signifi	cant	fi	gure	(the	digit	6)	that	is	uncertain	
by either plus or minus 1 mL. For greater accuracy, we might use a graduated cylinder 
that	has	fi	ner	divisions,	so	that	the	volume	we	measure	is	now	uncertain	by	only	0.1	mL.	
If the volume of the liquid is now found to be 6.0 mL, we may express the quantity as 
(6.0± 0.1) mL, and the actual value is somewhere between 5.9 mL and 6.1 mL. We 
can	further	improve	the	measuring	device	and	obtain	more	signifi	cant	fi	gures,	but	in	
every	case,	the	last	digit	is	always	uncertain;	the	amount	of	this	uncertainty	depends	
on the particular measuring device we use and the user’s ability.
Guidelines for Usin g Signiﬁ  cant Figures: 	We	must	always	be	careful	in	scientifi	c	
work	to	write	the	proper	number	of	signifi	cant	fi	gures.	In	general,	it	is	fairly	easy	to	
determine	how	many	signifi	cant	fi	gures	a	number	has	by	using	the	following	rules:	
1. Any digit that	is	not	zero	is	signifi	cant.	Thus,	845	cm	has	three	signifi	cant	fi	gures,	
1.234	kg	has	four	signifi	cant	fi	gures,	and	so	on.	
2. Zeros	between	nonzero	digits	are	signifi	cant.	Thus,	606	m	contains	three	signifi	cant	
fi	gures,	40,501	kg	contains	fi	ve	signifi	cant	fi	gures,	and	so	on.	
3. Zeros	to	the	left	of	the	fi	rst	nonzero	digit	are	not	signifi	cant.	Their	purpose	is	to	
indicate the placement of the decimal point. For example, 0.08 L contains one 
signifi	cant	fi	gure,	0.0000349	g	contains	three	signifi	cant	fi	gures,	and	so	on.	
4. If a number is greater than 1, then all the zeros written to the right of the decimal 
point	count	as	signifi	cant	fi	gures.	Thus,	2.0	mg	has	two	signifi	cant	fi	gures,	40.062	35Chemistr yGrade9 Measur ements andScientiﬁc Methods
mL	has	fi	ve	signifi	cant	fi	gures,	and	3.040	dm	has	four	signifi	cant	fi	gures.	If	a	
number is less than 1, then only the zeros that are at the end of the number and 
the	zeros	that	are	between	nonzero	digits	are	signifi	cant.	This	means	that	0.090	
kg	has	two	signifi	cant	fi	gures,	0.3005	L	has	four	signifi	cant	fi	gures,	0.00420	min	
has	three	signifi	cant	fi	gures,	and	so	on.	
5. For numbers that do not contain decimal points, the trailing zeros (that is, zeros 
after	the	last	nonzero	digit)	may	or	may	not	be	signifi	cant.	Thus,	400	cm	may	have	
one	signifi	cant	fi	gure	(the	digit	4),	two	signifi	cant	fi	gures	(40),	or	three	signifi	cant	
fi	gures	(400).	We	cannot	know	which	is	correct	without	more	information.	By	using	
scientifi	c	notation,	however,	we	avoid	this	ambiguity.	In	this	particular	case,	we	
can express the number 400 as 4×102	for	one	signifi	cant	fi	gure,	4.0×102 for two 
signifi	cant	fi	gures,	or	4.00×102	for	three	signifi	cant	fi	gures.
A	second	set	of	rules	specifi	es	how	to	handle	signifi	cant	fi	gures	in	calculations.	
1. In addition and subtraction, the answer cannot have more digits to the right of the 
decimal point than either of the original numbers. 
Consider these examples: 
 89.332  
+1.1  ← one digit after the decimal point
 90.432  ← round off to 90.4 
 2.097 
-0.12  ← two digits after the decimal point
  1.977   ←  round off to 1.98
The rounding-off procedure is as follows. To round off a number at a certain point we 
simply	drop	the	digits	that	follow	if	the	fi	rst	of	them	is	less	than	5.	Thus,	8.724	rounds	
off	to	8.72	if	we	want	only	two	digits	after	the	decimal	point.	If	the	fi	rst	digit	following	
the point of rounding off is equal to or greater than 5, we add 1 to the preceding 
digit. Thus, 8.727 rounds off to 8.73, and 0.425 rounds off to 0.43. 
2. In	multiplication	and	division,	the	number	of	signifi	cant	fi	gures	in	the	fi	nal	product	
or quotient is determined by the original number that has the smallest number of 
signifi	cant	fi	gures.	The	following	examples	illustrate	this	rule:	
2.8×4.5039=12.61092 → round off to 13
6.85  =0.0611388789  →  round off to 0.0611 112.04 
3. Keep	in	mind	that	exact	numbers	obtained	from	defi	nitions	(such	as	1	ft,	12	in,
where 12 is an exact number) or by counting numbers of objects can be considered 
to	have	an	infi	nite	number	of	signifi	cant	fi	gures.
Example 2.5 Signifi	cant	fi	gures
Determine the	number	of	signifi	cant	fi	gures	in	the	following	measurements:	(a)	394	cm,		36Chemistr yGrade9 Measur ements andScientiﬁc Methods
(b)   5.03 g     (c)   0.714 m,     (d)   0.052 kg,   (e)   2.720 × 1022  atoms,  
(f )   3000 mL.
Solution: (a)Three, because each digit is a nonzero digit. (b) Three, because zeros 
between	nonzero	digits	are	signifi	cant.	(c)	Three,	because	zeros	to	the	left	of	the	fi	rst	
non	zero	digit	do	not	count	as	signifi	cant	fi	gures.	(d)	Two.	Same	reason	as	in	(c).	(e)	
Four, because the number is greater than one, all the zeros written to the right of the 
decimal	point	count	as	signifi	cant	fi	gures.	(f)	This	is	an	ambiguous	case.	The	number	of	
signifi	cant	fi	gures	may	be	four	(3.000	×	103), three (3.00 × 103), two (3.0 × 103), or 
one (3 × 103).	This	example	illustrates	why	scientifi	c	notation	must	be	used	to	show	the	
proper	number	of	signifi	cant	fi	gures.	
Signifi	cant	fi	gures:	
Determine	 the	 number	 of	 signifi	cant	 fi	gures	 in	 each	 of	 the	 following	
measurements:    
a. 35 mL
b. 2008 g
c. 0.0580 m3d. 7.2 × 104 molecules
e. 830 kg.  Exercise 2.5
1. Arithmetic operations: Carry out the following arithmetic operations to the 
correct	number	of	signifi	cant	fi	gures:	
a. 11,254.1 g + 0.1983 g
b. 66.59 L – 3.113 L
c. 8.16 m × 5.1355d. 0.0154 kg ÷ 88.3 mL
e. 2.64 × 103 cm + 3.27 × 102
cm. 
2. Signifi	cant	Figures	(Addition	and	Subtraction)
a. Add 37.24 mL and 10.3 mL.
b. Subtract 21.2342 g from 27.87 g.
3. Signifi	cant	Figures	(Multiplication)
What is the area of a rectangle 1.23 cm wide and 12.34 cm long?Exercise 2.6
2.1.7 Scientiﬁ  c Notation and Decimal Places
We	 	 use	 scientifi	c	 notation	 when	 we	 deal with very large and very small 
numbers. For example, 197 grams of gold contains approximately 
602,000,000,00 0,000 ,000,000,000 gold atoms.
The mass of one gold atom is approximately 0.000 000 000 000 000 000 000 327 
gram. In using such large and small numbers, it is inconvenient to write down all the 37Chemistr yGrade9 Measur ements andScientiﬁc Methods
zeros.	In	scientifi	c	(exponential)	notation,	we	place	one	nonzero	digit	to	the	left	of	the	
decimal. 
602,000,000,00 0,000 ,000,000,000 = 6.02×1023
6 places to the left, therefore exponent of 10 is 6 
0.000 000 000 000 000 000 000 327 =3.27×10-22
    
4 places to the right, therefore exponent of 10 is -4. 
The reverse process converts numbers from exponential to decimal form. 
Example 2.6  Unit Conversions
The Ångstrom (Å) is a unit of length, 1×10-10 m,that provides a convenient scale on which 
to express the radii of atoms. Radii of atoms are often expressed in nanometers. The 
radius of a phosphorus atom is 1.10 Å. What is the distance expressed in centimeters 
and nanometers?
Plan
We use the equalities 1 Å= 1×10-10m, 1 cm = 1×10-2 m, and 1nm = 1× 10-9 m to 
construct the unit factors that convert 1.10 Å to the desired units.
Solution: Let x be the length in cm unit and y the length in nm.
x cm = 1.10 0Ax 1 x 10-10 m x  1cm          = 1.10 x 10-8 cm               10A              1 x 10-2 m 
y nm= 1.10 0Ax  1 x 10-10 m x  1nm          = 1.10 x 10-1 cm               10A              1 x 10-9 m 
Volume Calculation
Assuming	a	phosphorus	atom	is	spherical;	calculate	its	volume	in	Å3, cm3, and 
nm3. The formula for the volume of a sphere is  V =  4  πr3
        3  Refer to Example 
above.Exercise 2.7
2.2 Chemistry as Experimental Science
Learning competencies
At the end of this section, you should be able to
defi	ne	scientifi	c	method;
describe	the	major	steps	of	the	scientifi	c	method;
use	scientifi	c	methods	in	solving	problems;38Chemistr yGrade9 Measur ements andScientiﬁc Methods
demonstrate	some	experimental	skills	in	chemistry;
 describe the procedures of writing laboratory report.
Chemistry is largely an experimental science, and a great deal of knowledge comes 
from laboratory research. In addition, however, today’s chemist may use a computer 
to study the microscopic structure and chemical properties of substances or employ 
sophisticated electronic equipment to analyze pollutants from auto emissions or toxic 
substances in a soil. Many frontiers in biology and medicine are currently being 
explored at the level of atoms and molecules the structural units on which the study of 
chemistry is based. 
Chemists participate in the development of new drugs and in agricultural research. 
What’s more, they are seeking solutions to the problem of environmental pollution 
along with replacements for energy sources. And most industries, whatever their 
products, have a basis in chemistry. For example, chemists developed polymers (very 
large molecules) that manufacturers use to make a wide variety of goods, including 
clothing,	cooking	utensils,	artifi	cial	organs,	and	toys.	
Chemistry is evidence based. All chemical statements are based on experiment. 
Chemistry is part of the body of modern science. It shares the experimental method 
of all sciences. It improves in time also using new discoveries and concepts from other 
sciences. In turn, it provides both theoretical and experimental tools to different 
sciences. Biology and Geology cannot be studied without a thorough understanding 
of chemical phenomena. Indeed, because of its diverse applications, chemistry is often 
called the “central science.”
2.2.1 The Scien tiﬁ  c Method
Conduct the following activity and present your 
fi	nding	to	the	class.	
a. Collect	a	plastic	bag	fi	lled	with	different	items	
provided by your teacher.
b. Decide on the question you would like to answer 
about your bag. Write it down. (Do not open the 
bag)
c. Guess what the answer to your question might be. 
Write down. (Do not open the bag)
d. Open your bag and answer the questions.
e. Be sure to count the total number of items.
Now, discuss which part of the activity (a, b, c, d, or e) 
introduces	the	scientifi	c	terminology:	hypothesis,	data	
collection, experimentation, etc.   Activity 2.539Chemistr yGrade9 Measur ements andScientiﬁc Methods
The Scientiﬁ  c method
What	is	Scientifi	c	Method?	The	Scientifi	c	method	is	a	process	with	the	help	of	which	
scientists try to investigate, verify, or construct an accurate and reliable version of 
any natural phenomena. They are done by creating an objective framework for 
the	purpose	of	scientifi	c	inquiry	and	analyzing	the	results	scientifi	cally	to	come	to	a	
conclusion which either supports or contradicts the observation made at the beginning.
Scientiﬁ  c Method Steps
The	aim	of	all	scientifi	c	methods	is	the	same,	that	is,	to	analyze	the	observation	made	
at the beginning but there are various steps adopted as per the requirement of 
any given observation. However, there is a generally accepted sequence of steps of 
scientifi	c	methods	as	it	is	shown	in	Figure 2.8 .
Figure 2.8 The three main steps of the research process in studying chemistry and their 
relationships.
i. Observation	and	formulation	of	a	Question:	This	is	the	fi	rst	step	of	a	scientifi	c	
method. In order to start one, an observation has to be made into any 
observable aspect or phenomena of the universe and a question needs to be 
asked pertaining to that aspect. For example, you can ask, “Why is the sky black 
at night? or “Why is air invisible?”
ii. Data	Collection	and	Hypothesis:	The	next	step	involved	in	the	scientifi	c	method	is	
to collect all related data and formulate a hypothesis based on the observation. 
The hypothesis could be the cause of the phenomena, its effect, or its relation to 
any other phenomena.
iii. Testing the Hypothesis: After the hypothesis is made, it needs to be tested 
scientifi	cally.	Scientists	do	this	by	conducting	experiments.	The	aim	of	these	40Chemistr yGrade9 Measur ements andScientiﬁc Methods
experiments is to determine whether the hypothesis agrees with or contradicts the 
observations	made	in	the	real	world.	The	confi	dence	in	the	hypothesis	increases	
or decreases based on the result of the experiments.
iv. Analysis and Conclusion: This step involves the use of proper mathematical and 
other	scientifi	c	procedures	to	determine	the	results	of	the	experiment.	Based	on	
the analysis, the future course of action can be determined. If the data found 
in the analysis is consistent with the hypothesis, it is accepted. If not, then it is 
rejected	or	modifi	ed	and	analyzed	again.
It must be remembered that a hypothesis cannot be proved or disproved by doing 
one experiment. It needs to be done repeatedly until there are no discrepancies in the 
data and the result. When there are no discrepancies and the hypothesis is proved 
beyond	any	doubt,	it	is	accepted	as	a	‘theory’.
2.2.2 Some  Experimental Skills in Chemistry
Laboratory Safety Rules 
In the home, the kitchen and bathroom are the sites of most accidents. The chemical 
laboratory poses similar hazards and yet it can be no more dangerous than any other 
classroom if the following safety rules are always observed. Most of them are based 
on simple common sense. 
1. Responsible behaviour is essential. The dangers of spilled acids and chemicals and 
broken glassware created by thoughtless actions are too great to be tolerated. 
2. Wear approved eye protection at all times in the laboratory and in any area 
where chemicals are stored or handled. The only exception is when explicit 
instructions to the contrary are given by your teacher. 
3. Perform no unauthorized experiments. This includes using only the quantities 
instructed, no more.  Consult your teacher if you have any doubts about the 
instructions in the laboratory manual. 
4. Do	not	smoke	in	the	laboratory	at	any	time.	Not	only	is	smoking	a	fi	re	hazard,	
but smoking draws chemicals in laboratory air (both as vapours and as dust) into 
the lungs. 
5. In	case	of	fi	re	or	accident,	call	the	teacher	at	once.	Note	the	location	of	fi	re	
extinguishers and safety showers now so that you can use them if needed. 
6. Report	all	injuries	to	your	instructor	at	once.	Except	for	very	superfi	cial	injuries,	
you will be required to get medical treatment for cuts, burns, or fume inhalation. 
7. Do not eat or drink anything in the laboratory.
8. Avoid breathing fumes of any kind.
9. Never	use	mouth	suction	in	fi	lling	pipets	with	chemical	reagents.	Always	use	a	
suction device.
10. Never work alone in the laboratory. There must be at least one other person 
present in the same room.  In addition, your teacher should be quickly available.
11. Wear shoes in the laboratory. Bare feet are prohibited because of the danger 
from broken glass.  Sandals are prohibited because of the hazard from chemical 41Chemistr yGrade9 Measur ements andScientiﬁc Methods
spills.
12. Confi	ne	long	hair	and	loose	clothing	(such	as	ties)	in	the	laboratory.	They	may	
either	catch	fi	re	or	be	chemically	contaminated.	
a. A laboratory apron or lab coat provides protection at all times. A lab apron 
or lab coat is required when you are wearing easily combustible clothing 
(synthetic and light fabrics).
b. It is advisable to wear old clothing to laboratory, because it is both generally 
not	as	loose	and	ﬂ	ammable	as	new	clothing,	and	not	as	expensive	to	replace.
13. Keep your work area neat at all times. Clean up spills and broken glass 
immediately. Clutter not only will slow your work, but it leads to accidents. Clean 
up your work space, including wiping the surface and putting away all chemicals 
and equipment, at the end of the laboratory period. 
14. Be	careful	when	heating	liquids;	add	boiling	chips	to	avoid	“bumping”.	Flammable	
liquids	such	as	ethers,	hydrocarbons,	alcohols,	acetone,	and	carbon	disulfi	de	must	
never	be	heated	over	an	open	ﬂ	ame.
15. Always pour acids into water when mixing. Otherwise the acid can spatter, often 
quite violently.  Pour acid into water.
16. Do not force a rubber stopper onto glass tubing or thermometers. Lubricate the 
tubing and the stopper with glycerol or water.  Use paper or cloth towelling to 
protect your hands. Grasp the glass close to the stopper.
17. Dispose	of	excess	liquid	reagents	by	ﬂ	ushing	small	quantities	down	the	sink.	
Consult the teacher about large quantities.  Dispose of solids in crocks.  Never 
return reagents to the dispensing bottle.
18. Carefully read the experiment and answer the questions in the prelab before 
coming to the laboratory.  An unprepared student is a hazard to everyone in the 
room. 
19. Spatters are common in chemistry laboratories. Test tubes being heated or 
containing reacting mixtures should never be pointed at anyone.  If you observe 
this practice in a neighbour, speak to him or her or the teacher, if needed. 
20. If you have a cut on your hand, be sure to cover with a bandage or wear 
appropriate laboratory gloves. 
21. Finally, and most important, think about what you are doing.  Plan ahead.  Do not 
cookbook.  If you give no thought to what you are doing, you predispose yourself 
to an accident. 
Do you have any diagnosed  allergies or other special medical needs (check one)?   
Yes________             No___________ 
If yes, please list them in this space. 
I have read and understand the Laboratory Safety Rules and have retained a copy 
for my reference. 
_________________________________________                    __________________
   (Name)               (Date)42Chemistr yGrade9 Measur ements andScientiﬁc Methods
The	fi	rst	and	foremost	rule	of	any	laboratory	is	to	be	safe!	This	may	seem	obvious,	but	
people often disregard safety protocols for one reason or another, putting themselves 
and those around them in danger. The best thing you can do is to make sure you follow 
all safety protocols at all times.
Safety goggles are required wear in all chemistry labs. Not wearing them puts 
you in danger of eye irritation and possibly blindness in the case of an accident. 
A small droplet of acid could splash out of the container at any time. Better safe 
than	permanently	blinded!	Latex	gloves	should	be	used	when	there	is	a	possibility	
of corrosive chemicals spilling onto your hands. A lab apron or coat can also prevent 
injury in case of spills or splashes.
A beaker is a common container in most labs. It is used for mixing, stirring, and heating 
chemicals. Most beakers have spouts on their rims to aid in pouring. They also commonly 
have lips around their rims and markings to measure the volume they contain, although 
they are not a precise way to measure liquids. Beakers come in a wide range of sizes. 
Because of the lip that runs around the rim, a lid for a beaker does not exist. However, 
a watch glass can be used to cover the opening to prevent contamination or splashing. 
Figure 2.9  shows some of the commonly used laboratory equipments.
Crucible tongs
Utility clamp Clay triangle Wire gauzeTest tube 
holderSpatulaTest tube 
rack
Beaker Elenmeyer 
ﬂ	askFlorence 
ﬂ	askGraduated cylinder
Graduated 
pipetMedicine
dropperWatch 
glass Volumetric 
pipetFunnelEvaporating 
dish
Wash bottle Test tube BuretCrucible & 
coverRing support Bunsen burner Ring stand Scoopula Test tube 
brush
Figure 2.9  Commonly used Laboratory Equipment.43Chemistr yGrade9 Measur ements andScientiﬁc Methods
Conduct	the	following	activity	and	present	your	fi	nd-
ing to the class. 
Laboratory equipment
List down laboratory equipment you know and that are 
not shown in Figure 2.9. Describe their use. Which of 
them are used for measurement?  Activity 2.6
2.2.3 Writ ing a Laboratory Report
A. The  Pre-laboratory Report
Each experiment in this manual includes a pre-laboratory (prelab) report. The prelab 
report is to be completed before the experiment is begun in the laboratory. Its purpose 
is	to	ensure	familiarity	with	the	procedure	and	provide	for	a	more	effi	cient	utilization	
of limited laboratory time. The prelab questions can be answered after a careful 
reading of the introduction and procedure of the experiment. Sample calculations 
are sometimes included to provide awareness of data that needs to be collected and 
how it is treated. Your teacher may prefer to administer prelab quizzes instead of 
collecting prelab reports.   
B. The Labor atory Report
	A	good	laboratory	report	is	the	essential	fi	nal	step	in	performing	an	experiment.	It	is	
in this way that you communicate what you have done and what you have discovered. 
Since it is the only means, in many instances, of reporting results, it is important that it 
be prepared properly. 
A laboratory report is a fi	nal	draft.	As	such	it	is	always	written	in	ink	or	typed.	A	
typed laboratory report is necessary if your handwriting is hard to read. There must 
be no erasures or crossed out areas. The initial draft of a laboratory report belongs 
in your laboratory notebook for two reasons. 
1. It	is	unlikely	that	you	will	get	everything	correct	on	the	fi	rst	attempt	and,	thus,	a	
fi	rst	draft	written	on	the	report	form	itself	could	be	very	messy.	
2. If the report itself is lost or destroyed, you can easily and quickly rewrite the 
report from the notebook. 
It is essential that a laboratory report be neat. Studies have shown that when the same 
work is submitted in both neat and sloppy form, the neat version makes the better 
impression. Neat work indicates that the writer knows and cares about the subject 
matter. 
All data should be presented with the correct	signifi	cant	fi	gures	and	units.	The	omission	
of	units	makes	it	diffi	cult	for	the	reader	to	know	the	size	of	the	numbers	being	reported.	
And	writing	down	the	wrong	number	of	signifi	cant	fi	gures	amounts	to	lying	about	the	
precision	of	the	data.	Too	many	signifi	cant	fi	gures	imply	that	you	know	a	number	more	44Chemistr yGrade9 Measur ements andScientiﬁc Methods
precisely than you actually do. 
All questions should be answered with complete and grammatically correct sentences. 
Abbreviations should not be included in written answers. Read the sentence out loud 
to make sure that it makes sense. 
Your sample compu tations should	be	labeled	with	their	purpose,	for	example;	“mass	
of the liquid”. Within the computation, all numbers must have the correct units and the 
correct	number	of	signifi	cant	fi	gures.	
Laboratory reports that extend to more than one page should either be stapled 
together or have your name and the page number at the top right of each page.  For 
example:	Terhas	Asgedom,	page	2	of	4	pages.	This	makes	it	more	diffi	cult	for	the	
instructor to inadvertently misplace pages. Using a paper clip or tearing corners to 
hold pages together is not acceptable. Reports should also be dated.
Graph s
Graphs are used to present the data in picture form so that they can be more readily 
grasped by the reader. Occasionally, a graph is used to follow a trend. Notice 
that the best smooth curve is drawn through the data points. This is not the same as 
connecting	the	dots;	all	of	the	data	points	will	not	fall	on	the	line.		Often,	however,	
a	graph	is	used	to	show	how	well	data	fi	t	a	straight	line.	The	line	drawn	may	either	
be visually estimated (“eyeballed”) or computed mathematically. There are many 
essential features of a good graph. 
1. The axes must be both numbered and labeled. The abscissa is the right-to-left 
or the horizontal axis or x-axis.
2. The graph must have a title. When we speak of graphing, we always mention 
the	quantity	plotted	on	the	ordinate	fi	rst.	
3. The data points are never graphed as little dots. One may use small circles, 
small circles with a dot inside, crosses, asterisks, or X’s.  If dots are used, data 
are too easily lost on the graph or “created” by stray blobs of ink. 
4. Any lines that appear on the graph in addition to data points should be 
explained. Thus, the line drawn is explained in the title as “(visually estimated 
best straight line).” 
5. The	scales	of	the	axes	should	be	adjusted	so	that	the	graph	fi	lls	the	page	as	
much as possible. 
Measurements and Density
Chemistry is very much an experimental science in which careful and accurate 
measurements are the very essence of meaningful experimentation. It is, therefore, 
essential	for	the	beginning	student	to	learn	how	scientifi	c	measurements	are	carried	
out properly through the use of common measuring instruments. It is equally important 
for	the	student	to	acquire	an	appreciation	of	the	signifi	cance	of	measurements	and	to	45Chemistr yGrade9 Measur ements andScientiﬁc Methods
apply	learned	technique	to	a	common	specifi	c	experiment.	
In the following ex periment you will become familiar with how mass and volume 
measurements	are	carried	out	and	how	an	evaluation	of	the	measurements	is	reﬂ	ected	
in	the	number	of	signifi	cant	fi	gures	recorded.	These	mass	and	volume	measurements	
will then be used to determine the density of (1) a metal bar and (2) a salt solution 
by two different methods. Finally, the results of the density measurements will be 
evaluated with respect to their precision and accuracy. 
The density of an object is one of its most fundamental and useful characteristics. As 
an intensive property it is independent of the quantity of material measured since 
it is the ratio of the mass of an object to its volume. The density of an object can 
be determined by a variety of methods. In this experiment you will practice using a 
balance to measure mass. In addition, you will learn how to measure volume using a 
graduated cylinder and a pipet and learn how to calibrate the pipet. A comparison 
of the results allows for the calculation of the relative average deviation, which is a 
measure of the precision of the experiment.
Intensive and extensive properties
Defi	ne	the	terms	intensive	and	extensive	properties.	List 
down examples of intensive and extensive property.
  Activity 2.7
Also, in the case of the metal bar, the results of measuring the density of the bar may 
be compared with the accepted density value for the bar. Thereby the relative error 
(a measure of accuracy) for the density of the bar may be determined. The sections in 
the	Introduction	to	this	laboratory	manual	pertaining	to	precision,	accuracy,	signifi	cant	
fi	gures,	and	the	laboratory	notebook	should	be	studied	carefully	before	performing	
this experiment. 
Materials a nd Che micals
Cylindrical metal bars (Al, Cu, brass), approximately 51 cm (diameter), measuring 
rules (graduated in mm), 20or 25 mL transfer pipets, 50 mL beaker, graduated 
cylinders	(10	and	50	mL	or	100	mL),	125	mL	Erlenmeyer	ﬂ	ask,	stopper,	thermometers,	
and balances with precision to 1 mg. Saturated salt solutions (NaCl and/or KCl are 
convenient) – about 36 g NaCl is required/100 mL. Estimated Time: 2-3 hours
Safety Precautio ns
Review the safety rules. Take special care in inserting the bar into the graduated 
cylinder.	Do	not	drop	it	in!	The	glass	cylinder	may	break.	Pipeting	should	always	be	
done using a suction device. Never suction by mouth. 46Chemistr yGrade9 Measur ements andScientiﬁc Methods
Procedures
Record all measurements in your laboratory notebook in ink.  The proper use of a 
sensitive balance is critical to useful mass measurements.  Also, pipeting is a very 
useful, accurate, and common method for transferring exact volumes of liquids.  
Therefore, the instructor should demonstrate good balance and pipet techniques to 
the class at the beginning of the laboratory period.  Please note that when a portion 
of the experiment contains the instruction “Repeat . . . twice,” each portion is to be 
performed all the way through three times:  initially and two repetitions.
Part I:  Measurements
A. Mass M easurements
After balance instruction, you will be assigned or allowed to select a balance for use 
during the experiment. 
1. Zero the balanc e after cleaning the pan.
2. Measure the mass of a clean dry 50 mL beaker to the nearest ±0.001 g.
3. Record, in ink, your observation directly into the lab notebook.
4. Remove the beaker from the pan.  Again, clean the balance pan and zero the 
balance.
5. Weigh the same beaker as before (step 2) and record the result.
6. Repeat steps 4 and 5 one more time.
7. From the three mass measurements, calculate the average mass of the beaker.
8. Repeat steps 4 and 5 using a second balance (just one weighing).
9. Repeat steps 4 and 5 using a third balance (just one weighing). 
B. Volum e Measurements
Use of a pipet: In order to accurately measure a liquid volume using a pipet, you 
must consider several things. Most volumetric pipets are designed to deliver rather 
than	to	contain	the	specifi	ed	volume.	Thus,	a	small	amount	of	liquid	remains	in	the	tip	
of the pipet after transfer of liquid. This kind of pipet is marked with the letters “TD” 
somewhere on the barrel above the calibration line. Also, for purpose of safety, never 
pipet	by	mouth;	that	is,	never	use	your	mouth	to	draw	liquid	into	the	pipet.	Always	use	
a suction device. 
Use a clean but not necessarily dry 20 or 25 mL pipet. Rinse the pipet several times 
with small portions of the liquid to be transferred. To measure the desired volume, 
a volume of liquid greater than that to be measured is needed in order to keep the 
pipet	tip	under	the	liquid	surface	while	fi	lling.	
While holding the pipet ve rtically, squeeze the air out of the suction device and hold 
it against the large end of the pipet, tight enough to obtain a seal. Keep the suction 
device evacuated and dip the pipet tip below the surface of the liquid, but do not 
touch the bottom of the container (A chipped tip causes error). Now release the suction 
device	gently	and	allow	liquid	to	fi	ll	the	pipet	until	it	is	one	to	two	cm	above	the	
calibration line etched onto the upper barrel. Quickly remove the suction device and 47Chemistr yGrade9 Measur ements andScientiﬁc Methods
cover	the	end	with	your	index	fi	nger	before	the	liquid	level	falls	below	the	line	(some	
practice may be necessary). Wipe the outside of the tip with a clean piece of towel 
or tissue. With the tip touching the wall of the source container above the liquid level, 
allow it to drain until the meniscus rests exactly on the line. Now hold the pipet over 
the sample container and allow it to drain, but be careful to avoid loss from splashing. 
When the swollen part of the pipet is nearly empty, touch the tip to the wall of the 
container and continue draining. When the liquid level falls to the tip area, hold the 
tip to the glass for an additional 20 seconds and then remove. Do not blow out the 
remaining liquid. 
1. Measure the temperature in the laboratory. Your teacher will provide you with 
the density of water at this temperature. 
2. Use the same 50 mL beaker from Section A for determining the mass of each 
aliquot of water. Rather than re-weighing the empty beaker, the average mass 
of the beaker determined in Section A may be used as the mass of the dry 
beaker. 
3. Measure 20 or 25 mL of water (depending on the size of pipet available) into 
the 50 mL beaker.
4. Record the volume of water measured with the pipet to the appropriate number 
of	signifi	cant	fi	gures.
5. Record	the	number	of	signifi	cant	fi	gures	in	the	volume	measurement.
6. Weigh the beaker and water to the nearest mg (±0.001 g).
7. Calculate the mass of water in the beaker.
8. Use the mass and density of water to determine the volume of water measured.
9. Repeat steps 3 – 8 using a 50 or 100 mL graduated cylinder instead of the 
pipet to measure the 20 or 25mL of water. Repeat steps 3 – 8 again using a 
graduated 50 mL beaker to measure the water.
C. Calibration of a Volumetric Pipet
Your teacher may suggest that you calibrate your pipet. When you do so, use a 
pure liquid of known temperature.  Usually water is most convenient to use. Pipet 
distilled	water	into	a	pre-weighed	ﬂ	ask	with	stopper.	After	pipeting,	weigh	the	ﬂ	ask,	
stopper, and add water. Use the measured mass of water and its density value at that 
temperature, given by your teacher, to calculate the volume of the liquid delivered by 
the	pipet	to	four	signifi	cant	fi	gures.	Do	at	least	three	separate	determinations.
PART II:  Den sity
A. Density of a Metal Bar (Use the same metal bar for all trials.)
1. Zero your balance. Weigh a metal bar on a balance sensitive to the nearest 
mg (±0.001 g).Repeat the entire weighing operation twice. Do not allow the 
fi	rst	measurement	that	you	obtain	to	inﬂ	uence	subsequent	measurements	that	
you make. Make sure you zero the balance before proceeding with each 
measurement. 
2. Determine the volume of the metal bar by each of the following methods, 48Chemistr yGrade9 Measur ements andScientiﬁc Methods
making	at	least	three	measurements	for	each	method.	Do	not	allow	the	fi	rst	
measurement	to	inﬂ	uence	subsequent	measurements	as	your	data	will	then	be	
less	signifi	cant	for	the	purpose	of	measuring	the	precision	of	this	experiment.	
Metho d I
Insert	the	bar	into	a	graduated	cylinder	fi	lled	with	enough	water	so	that	the	bar	
is immersed. Note and record as precisely as possible the initial water level, and 
the water level after the bar is immersed. Read the lowest point of the meniscus in 
determining the water level and estimate the volume to one digit beyond the smallest 
scale division. Discard the water and repeat this measurement twice with a different 
initial volume of water. Calculate the average density of the bar. 
Method II
Measure the dimensions of the bar with a measuring stick ruled in centimetres. Repeat 
these measurements twice. Calculate the volume of the bar from these dimensions. 
Because the bar is cylindrical in shape, note that the formula for the volume of a 
cylinder	should	be	used	(V=	πr2h).Calculate the average density of the bar. 
3. For each method, determine the relative error of your result comparing it with 
the accepted value as provided by your instructor or as found in a reference 
such as the Handbook of Chemistry and Physics.
Which one of the two methods is more accurate? Explain.
B. Densit y of a Salt Solution
1. Weigh	a	125	mL	Erlenmeyer	ﬂ	ask	and	stopper.	With	a	clean	20.00	or	25.00	
mL	volumetric	pipet,	pipet	the	salt	solution	into	the	ﬂ	ask	and	reweigh.	Repeat	
this measurement twice, with a different sample of the same solution. Calculate 
the average density of the salt solution. 
2. Weigh an empty, dry 10 mL graduated cylinder. Fill with about 9-10 mL of salt 
solution, record the volume as precisely as possible, and reweigh. Repeat this 
measurement twice, with a different sample of solution each time. Calculate the 
average density of the salt solution. 
3. For each method determine the relative average deviation of your results. 
Which method is more precise? Explain.
Dispo sal
Salt solutions:   Do one of the following, as indicated by your teacher.
a. Recycle: Return the salt solution to its original container.
b. Treatment/disposal: 	Dilute	the	salt	solution	1:10	with	tap	water	and	ﬂ	ush	down	
the sink with running water.
c. Disposal: Put the salt solution in a waste bottle labeled inorganic waste.49Chemistr yGrade9 Measur ements andScientiﬁc Methods
Report    Name ______________________ Section _________
Questions
1. From your data, calculate the volume occupied by 100 g of the following:
b. salt solution 
c. metal bar 
2. From your answers to question 1 determine whether the metal bar or the salt 
solution occupies the larger volume.  Explain your answer in the context of the 
densities of solids and liquids in general. 
3. Defi	ne	the	terms	precision	and	accuracy	in	such	a	way	as	to	distinguish	between	
them. 
4. Are your results for the metal bar more precise or more accurate?  Explain. 
5. From your data for the salt solution, evaluate the two methods in terms of their 
precision.  Which method should lead to greater precision?  Which method 
actually is more precise?  Explain.
Prelab 
Measurements and Density 
The following data were obtained in order to determine the density of a cylindrical 
metal bar. 
Trial 1 1 2 3
Height (cm) 6.50 6.45 6.44
Diameter (cm) 1.25 1.26 1.22
Mass (g) 46.683 46.332 47.014
In the following calculations on this data, show the formula used, the substituted 
numbers, and the result. 
1. Calculate the average density of the bar. 
2. Calculate the percent relative average deviation of the measurements. 
3. If the accepted value for the density of the bar is 6.70 g/cm3, what is the 
percent relative error? 
4. Are these measurements more precise or more accurate?  Explain. 
5. What is the purpose of repetition in measurements?  
Key terms
 Accuracy 
 Calibration 
 Derived units 
 Decimal places 
 Error 
 Exact numbers 
 Laboratory safety
 Laboratory equipment 
 Measurement  Measured numbers 
Signifi	cant	fi	gures
Scientifi	c	notations
Scientifi	c	method	
 SI units 
Prefi	xes
 Precision 
 Uncertainty50Chemistr yGrade9 Measur ements andScientiﬁc Methods
Unit Summary
 The International System (SI) uses a particular selection of metric units. It employs 
seven	base	units	combined	with	prefixes	to	obtain	units	of	various	sizes.	Units	for	
other quantities are derived from these. 
 To obtain a derived unit in SI for a quantity such as the volume or density, you 
merely	substitute	base	units	into	a	defining	equation	for	the	quantity.
 SI units are used to express physical quantities in all sciences, including chemistry. 
Scientifi	c	notation	helps	us	handle	very	large	and	very	small	quantities.	Most	
measured quantities are inexact to some extent. 
The	number	of	signifi	cant	fi	gures	indicates	the	exactness	of	the	measurement.
Accuracy	is	defi	ned	as	how	closely	a	measured	value	agrees	with	the	correct	value.
Precision	is	defi	ned	as	closely	repeated	measurements	of	the	same	quantity	
agree with one another.
 Chemistry is an experimental science in that the facts of chemistry are obtained 
by experiment.
The	scientifi	c	method	is	a	systematic	approach	to	research	that	begins	with	the	
gathering of information through observation and measurements. In the process, 
hypotheses, laws, and theories are devised and tested.
The	key	to	signifi	cance	in	experimental	measurements	is	repetition.		Only	with	
repeated measurements of the density, concentration, or other quantities can the 
experimenter	have	some	confi	dence	in	the	signifi	cance	of	measurements.
Review Exercise
Part I: Basic level questions.
Indicate True or False for the following Statements.
1. There is always a degree of uncertainty involved with every measurement. 
2. Multiplication	of	36,000	and	52.00	give	the	signifi	cant	value	1872.000.	
3. There	are	four	signifi	cant	numbers	in	70.03.	
4. While adding or subtracting a quantity, the answer contain no more decimal 
places than the least accurate measurement. 
5. The	signifi	cant	fi	gures	in	a	number	include	all	of	the	certain	digits	plus	one	doubtful	
digit. 
6. In the following expression 0.01208 0.0236 , the answer should be reported up 
to four decimal places. 
7. It is desirable for the sides of a graduated cylinder to be perfectly vertical. 
Part II: Intermediate level questions. 
For each question, four alternative choices are given, of which only one is correct. You 
have to select the correct alternative and mark it in the appropriate option.
8. Calculate	 the	 following	 using	 proper	 number	 of	 signifi	cant	 fi	gures:			
(20.035×0.03120)/(4×0.333) 51Chemistr yGrade9 Measur ements andScientiﬁc Methods
a. 0.47
b. 0.40c. 0.469
d. 0.4692 
9. A sample of nickel weighs 7.5425 g and has a density of 8.8 g/cm3. What is the 
volume	with	the	correct	number	of	signifi	cant	fi	gures?	
a. 1.33 cm3
b. 9.2 cm3c. 0.86 cm3
d. None o f the above 
10. The mass of copper is 0.063546 kg and the density is 8.940 g/cm3. Calculate the 
volume	using	scientifi	c	fi	gures.	
a. 7.108 cm3
b. 7.10 cm3c. 7.1080 cm3
d. 7.1 cm3
11. Which of the following statements are correct for a burette? 
a. The burette is designed to accurately deliver a volume of liquid
b. The burette is used for measuring the volume of liquid used from the burette 
c. The burette volume can be measured to the hundredths place
d. All of the above 
12. When expressed as 7.5×104,	only	the	signifi	cant	fi	gures	of	_____	are	to	be	
considered. 
a. 7.5
b. 7.05 c. 7.005
d. None of the above 
13. The mass of an element is .007502 × 10−26	g.	Find	the	number	of	signifi	cant	
fi	gures	when	the	mass	is	converted	to	mg.	(Both	mass	values	have	same	order	of	
magnitude) 
a. 4
b. 5c. 3
d. 2 
14. A cube like crystal structure has length 6.000 cm, width 6.00 cm and height 0.0600 
m.	Calculate	its	volume	with	correct	signifi	cant	fi	gures.	
a. 216 cubic cm
b. 21.600 cubic cm c. 18.00 cm
d. None of the above 
15. What	is	the	sum	of	22.82	+	2.2457	with	the	correct	number	of	signifi	cant	fi	gures.	
a. 25.065
b. 25.09c. 25.06
d. 25.0651
16. The weights of sodium chloride salt in three petri dishes are 99.99 g, 100.13 g, 
and 100.23 g respectively. Which of the following is the average mass of salt? 
a. 100.1166 g
b. 100.116 gc. 100.11 g
d. 100.1 g 
17. Which	of	the	following	expresses	the	one	millionth	of	one	in	3	signifi	cant	places?
a. 0.01×10−6
b. 0.10×106c. 0.001×10−6
d. 1.00×10−6
18. Calculate	the	number	of	signifi	cant	fi	gures	up	to	which	(2.36×0.07251)/(2.103	)	
will be expressed.
a. 2
b. 3 c. 4
d. 5Chemistr yGrade9
52Chemistr yGrade9
Part III: Advanced level questions. 
Answer the following questions. 
19. Give the SI units for expressing these: 
a. length, 
b. area, 
c. volume, d. mass, 
e. time, 
f. force, g. energy, 
h. temperature.
20. Write	the	numbers	for	these	prefixes:	
a. mega-
b. kilo- 
c. deci-d. centi- 
e. milli- 
f. micro-g. nano- 
h. pico-
21. Define	density.	What	units	do	chemists	normally	use	for	density?	
22. Write the equations for converting degrees Celsius to degrees Fahrenheit and 
degrees Fahrenheit to degrees Celsius.
23. Carry	out	the	following	arithmetic	operations	to	the	correct	number	of	signifi	cant	
fi	gures:				
a. 12,343.2 g + 0.1893 g 
b. 55.67 L – 2.386 L  
c. 7.52 m × 6.9232 d. 0.0239 kg ÷ 46.5 mL 
e. 5.21 × 103 cm + 2.92 × 102 cm
24. Carry out the following arithmetic operations and round off the answers to the 
appropriate	number	of	signifi	cant	fi	gures:	
a. 26.5862 L + 0.17 L, 
b. 9.1 g – 4.682 g, 
c. 7.1 × 104 dm × 2.2654 × 102 dm d. 6.54 g ÷ 86.5542 mL, 
e. (7.55 × 104 m) – (8.62 × 103m).
25. Carry out each of the following conversions. 
a. 18.5	m	to	km;	
b. 16.3	km	to	m;	c. 247	kg	to	g;	
d. 4.32	L	to	mL;	e. 85.9	dL	to	L;	
f. 8251 L to cm3
26. Express 
a. 283°C	in	K;	
b. 15.25	K	in	°C;	c. 32.0°C	in	°F;	
d. 100.0°F in K.
27. Express 
a. 0°F	in	°C;	
b. 98.6°F	in	K;	c. 298	K	in	°F;	
d. 11.3°C in °F.
28. Percent error is often expressed as the absolute value of the difference between 
the true value and the experimental value, divided by the true value: 
Percent error =|True value - Experimental value|x 100             |True value|
Where the vertical lines indicate absolute value. Calculate the percent error for these 
measurements:
a. The density of alcohol (ethanol) is found to be 0.802 g/mL. (True value: 0.798 g/
mL.) 
b. The mass of gold in an earring is analyzed to be 0.837 g. (True value: 0.864 g.)Chemistr yGrade9 Chemistr yGrade9
UNIT/gid00020/gid00020
Unit Outcomes 
At the end of this unit, you will be able to
discuss the development of Dalton’s Atomic Theory and Modern Atomic 
Theory;
explain	the	discovery	of	the	proton,	electron,	neutron	and	the	nucleus;
differentiate the terms like atomic number, mass number, atomic mass, 
isotope,	energy	level,	valence	electrons	and	electron	confi	guration;
develop skills in determining the number of protons, electrons and neutrons 
of atoms from atomic numbers and mass numbers, 
develop skills in 
calculating	the	atomic	masses	of	elements	that	have	isotopes;
writing	the	ground-state	electron	confi	gurations	of	atoms	using	main	
energy	levels	and	drawing	diagrammatic	representations	of	atoms;			
demonstrate	scientifi	c	inquiry	skills:	observing,	comparing	and	contrasting,	
communicating, asking questions, and applying concepts.STRUCTURE OF THE ATOM
54Chemistr yGrade9 Structur eoftheAtom
Students make groups and discuss on the following 
questions and present your discussion points to the class. 
1. What is the smallest seed you have ever known?
2. What is it made of?
3. Did you know what its inside and outside looks like?
4. How easy is it to draw its inside and outside?Start-up Activity
The existence of atoms has been proposed since the time of early Indian and Greek 
philosophers (400 B.C.) who were of the view that atoms are the fundamental building 
blocks of matter. According to them, the continued subdivisions of matter would 
ultimately	yield	atoms	which	would	not	be	further	divisible.	The	word	‘atom’	has	been
derived	from	the	Greek	word	‘a-tomos’	which	means	‘uncutable’	or	‘non-divisible’.	
These earlier ideas were mere speculations and there was no way to test them  
experimentally. These ideas remained dormant for a very long time and were revived 
again by John Dalton in the beginning of nineteenth century in terms of his atomic 
theory.	The	atomic	theory	of	matter	was	fi	rst	proposed	on	a	fi	rm	scientifi	c	basis	by	
John Dalton, a British school teacher in 1808. His theory, called Dalton’s atomic theory, 
regarded the atom as the ultimate particle of matter.
3.1   Historical Development of the Atomic Theories of Matter
At the end of this section, you will be able to	state	brieﬂ	y	the	history	of	development	
of atomic nature of substances.
Students, form groups and discuss the following questions. 
Present your discussion points to the class when you are asked 
by your teacher.
1. What are the simplest components of wood, rocks, and 
living	organisms?	In	other	words,	what	could	you	fi	nd	if	you	
split these materials to the least possible limit?
2. The Universe in which we live is so vast and contains the 
stars, the Sun, the Moon, the planets, dust, air, water, soil 
and other materials. Do you know what all these things are 
made of?
3. What do you think is the importance of knowing the nature 
of substances?   Activity 3.1
A	scientifi	c	theory	is	a	well-tested,	broad	explanation	of	a	natural	phenomenon.	In	55Chemistr yGrade9 Structur eoftheAtom
everyday life, we often use the word theory to mean a hypothesis or educated guess, 
but a theory in the context of science is not simply a guess. It is an explanation 
based on extensive and repeated experimentation. Because it is so well supported, a 
scientifi	c	theory	has	a	very	good	chance	of	being	a	correct	explanation	for	events	in	
nature. Since it is a broad explanation, it can explain many observations and pieces 
of evidence. In other words, it can help connect and make sense of many phenomena in 
the natural world. Chemistry is full of abstract concepts that deal with the microscopic 
world. To explain these abstract and microscopic concepts, scientists spent a lot of time 
and energy. In this section, we are going to see the origin of the Atomic Theory.
All modern scientists accept the concept of the atom, but when the concept of the atom 
was	fi	rst	proposed	about	2,500	years	ago,	ancient	philosophers	laughed	at	the	idea.	
It	has	always	been	diffi	cult	to	convince	people	bout	the	existence	of	things	that	are	
too small to see. We will spend some time considering the evidence (observations) that 
convince scientists of the existence of atoms.
The Indivi sible Atom
Greek philosophy was emerged early in the 6th century BC, centered in the city of 
Miletus on the Ionian coast in Asia Minor (now called Turkey). In the middle of the 5th
century BC, an ancient Greek philosopher, Empedocles, thought that all materials are 
made up of four things called elements: earth, air , water , and ﬁ  re.
Plato (student of Socrates and teacher of Aristotle) adopted Empedocles’ Theory, and 
coined the term element to describe these four substances. His successor, Aristotle, also 
adopted the concept of four elements. He introduced the idea that elements can be 
differentiated based on properties such as hot versus cold, and wet versus dry. For 
example, heating clay in an oven could be thought of as driving off water and adding 
fi	re,	transforming	clay	into	a	pot.	Similarly,	water	(cold	&	wet)	falls	from	the	sky	as	
rain, when air (hot and wet) cools down. The Greek concept of four elements existed 
for more than two thousand years.
Democritus (460-370 B.C) was a Greek philosopher born in Abdera in the north of 
Greece. Democritus was a student of Leucippus, who proposed the atomic theory of 
matter. There is little documentation on the philosophy of Leucippus. It was Democritus, 
who elaborated extensive works on his theories on the atomic structure of the physical 
world, of the universe, and the void of space. Although Democritus was a philosopher, 
he is included among the list of great pioneers of physics and chemistry of the 19th
and 20th centuries. This is because many of his teachings on the structure of matter 
were demonstrated by scientists over 2000 years after his death.
Democritus taught the theory of atomism, which held the belief that indivisible and 
indestructible atoms are the basic components of all matter in the universe. Thus the 
word atom is derived from the Greek atomos meaning indivisible56Chemistr yGrade9 Structur eoftheAtom
    
    
Figure 3.1  From left to right: Democritus, and Leucippus of Miletus.
Give the correct answer for the following questions.
1. According to the Greek philosopher Empedocles, what are the four elements 
that all materials are made up of?
2. What is the contribution of Plato and Aristotle to the Atomic Theory?Exercise 3.1
The Greek Concept of ‘Atomos’
Students, discuss in groups of two or three the following 
questions and present your discussion points to the class. 
1. If you were given the right to name the smallest 
thing you obtained after splitting a substance to the 
possible limit, what do you call it?
2. Why do you give that name?
3. Do you think it is the right term to describe the 
smallest particle from which every substance is 
made up of?   Activity 3.2
About 2,500 years ago, early Greek philosophers believed the entire universe w as 
a single, huge, entity. In other words, “everything was one.” They believed that all 
objects, all matter, and all substances were connected as a single, big, unchangeable 
‘thing’.	
Around 440 BC, Leucippus of Miletus originated the atom concept. He and his pupil, 
Democritus	(c	460	-	371	BC)	of	Abdera,	refi	ned	and	extended	it	in	future	years.	The	
work of Leucippus and Democritus was further developed by Epicurus (341- 270 BC), 
who made the ideas more generally known. Aristotle (384 - 322 BC) quotes both of 
them	extensively	in	arguing	against	their	ideas.	There	are	fi	ve	major	points	to	their	
atomic idea.57Chemistr yGrade9 Structur eoftheAtom
i. All matter is composed of atoms, which are bits of matter too small to be seen. 
These atoms cannot be further split into smaller portions. Democritus reasoned 
that	if	matter	could	be	infi	nitely	divided,	it	was	also	subjected	to	complete	
disintegration	from	which	it	can	never	be	put	back	together.	In	Greek,	the	prefi	x	
‘a’	means	‘not’	and	the	word	‘tomos’	means	‘cut’.	Our	word	atom,	therefore,	comes	
from atomos, a Greek word meaning uncuttable.
ii. There is a void, which is an empty space between atoms. Leucippus believed in the 
existence of an empty space between atoms. Given that all matter is composed of 
atoms, then all changes must be as a result of the movement of atoms. However, 
to	move	there	must	be	a	void;	a	space	entirely	empty	of	matter	through	which	
atoms can move from place to place. The problem with this assumption is that, if 
there is an entirely void space between atoms, then what held the atoms together? 
Leucippus and Democritus did not answer this question.
iii. Atoms are completely solid. This means that there can be no void inside an atom 
itself. An atom would be subjected to changes from outside and could disintegrate, 
otherwise. Then, it would not be an atom. 
iv. Atoms are homogeneous, with no internal structure. The absolute solidity of the 
atoms also leads to the notion that atoms are homogeneous, or the same all the 
way through. Another way to express this is that an atom would have no internal 
structure. 
v. Atoms are different in their sizes, shapes, and weight. Democritus then reasoned 
that changes occur when the many atomos (now known as atoms) in an object 
were reconnected or recombined in different ways. Democritus even extended 
this theory suggesting that there were different varieties of atomos with different 
shapes, sizes, and masses. He thought, however, that shape, size, and mass were 
the only properties differentiating the different types of atomos. According to 
Democritus,	other	characteristics	like	color	and	taste	did	not	reﬂ	ect	properties	of	
the atomos themselves, but rather, resulted from the different ways in which the 
atomos were combined and connected. The generally accepted atomic model of 
Democritus	is	called	‘the solid sphere’.
However, since Aristotle and other prominent thinkers of the time strongly opposed 
their idea of the atom, their theory was disregarded and essentially buried until 
the 16th and 17th centuries. In time, Lavoisier’s innovative 18th-century experiments 
accurately measured all substances involved in the burning process, proving that 
“when substances burn, there is no net gain or loss of weight.” Lavoisier established 
the science of modern chemistry , which gained greater acceptance. This is because 
of the efforts of John Dalton, who modernized the ancient Greek ideas of element, 
atom, compound, and molecule. Dalton also provided a means of explaining chemical 
reactions in quantitative terms.58Chemistr yGrade9 Structur eoftheAtom
Drawbacks of the Early Greek Philosophers
The early Greek philosophers tried to understand the nature of the world through 
reason and logic, but not through experiment and observation. As a result, they had 
some very thought-provoking ideas, but they felt no need to justify their ideas based 
on life experiences. In a lot of ways, you can think of the Greek philosophers as being 
“all thought and no action.” It’s truly amazing how much they achieved using their 
minds, but because they never performed any experiments, they missed or rejected a 
lot of discoveries that they could have made otherwise. Greek philosophers dismissed 
Democritus’ Theory entirely. Sadly, it took over two millennia before the theory of 
atomos	(or	‘atoms’	as	they	are	known	today)	was	fully	appreciated.
Give the correct answer for the following questions.
1. Where,	by	whom,	and	when	was	the	concept	‘atom’	was	originated?
2. What	does	the	word	‘atom’	mean?
3. What	are	the	fi	ve	major	points	of	the	atomic	ideas,	according	to	the	Greek	
philosophers?
4. According to the ancient Greek philosophers, what do you think is an atom 
like? Can you draw it in your exercise book?
5. What example can you give, from a local material around you, that you 
think looks like an atom?Exercise 3.2
3.2   Fundamental Laws of Chemical Reactions
We are living in a world full of laws. Laws  are generalized observations about a 
relationship between two or more things in the natural world. Scientifi	c	laws or laws of 
science are statements, based on repeated experiments or observations, that describe 
or predict a range of natural phenomena. They don’t explain why the phenomenon 
exists or what causes it. The explanation of a phenomenon is called a scientifi	c	theory . 
Chemical Laws  are those laws of nature relevant to chemistry. In this section, we are 
going to discuss some of the chemical laws.
3.2.1 The Law of Conservation of Mass
At the end of this section, you will be able to
state the law of conservation of mass and illustrate using examples.
describe the law of conservation of mass using simple experiments.59Chemistr yGrade9 Structur eoftheAtom
Students, form a group of two or three and discuss 
the following questions. Present your discussion points 
to the class. 
1. Which	direction	is	water	ﬂ	owing	in	your	locality,	
from an area of high to low or from low to high 
altitude?
2. Will	the	direction	of	ﬂ	ow	of	water	change	in	places	
other than your locality? How?
3. If you dissolve 3g of sugar in 20 g of water, how 
many grams of a sugar solution will you get? Is it 
correct if we write: sugar (3g) + water (20 g) = 
sugar solution (23 g)?
4. What	will	happen	to	the	mass	of	pieces	of	campfi	re	
wood after burning it? Do you think the mass of the 
pieces	of	the	campfi	re	wood	is	equal	to	the	mass	
of the ash we get from burning it? Why?   Activity 3.3
In science, a law is a general statement that explains a large number of observations. 
Before	being	accepted,	a	law	must	be	verifi	ed	many	times	under	many	conditions.	
Laws	are,	therefore,	considered	the	highest	form	of	scientifi	c	knowledge,	and	are	
generally supposed to be unbreakable .	Scientifi	c	laws	form	the	core	of	scientifi	c	
knowledge.	One	scientifi	c	law	that	provides	the	foundation	for	understanding	in	
chemistry is the Law of Conservation of Mass . The law of conservation of mass is also 
known	as	the	‘Law of Indestructibility of Matter’. It states that in any given system that 
is closed to the transfer of matter (in and out), the amount of matter in the system stays 
unchanged. A simple way of expressing this law is to say that the amount of matter in 
a system is conserved. 
The Law of Conservation of Mass dates from Antoine Lavoisier’s 1789 discovery that 
mass is neither created nor destroyed in chemical reactions. In other words, the mass 
of any one element at the beginning of a reaction will equal the mass of that element 
at the end of the reaction. If we account for all reactants and products in a chemical 
reaction, the total mass will be the same at any point in time in any closed system. 
These laws are called the Laws of Chemical Combination. Ten years later, Joseph 
Louis Proust proposed the Law	of	Defi	nite	Proportions , which states that the masses of 
elements	in	a	compound	always	occur	in	the	same	proportion.	Lavoisier’s	fi	nding	laid	
the groundwork for modern chemistry and revolutionized the science.
These theories didn’t reference atoms, yet John Dalton built upon them to develop the 
Law of Multiple Proportions , which states that the ratios of masses of elements in a 
compound are small whole numbers. Dalton’s Law of Multiple Proportions drew from 
experimental data. He proposed that each chemical element consists of a single type 60Chemistr yGrade9 Structur eoftheAtom
of atom that could not be destroyed by any chemical means. These ultimately formed 
the basis of Dalton’s Atomic Theory of Matter . His work marked the beginning of the 
scientifi	c	atomic	theory.	
According to the Law of Conservation of Mass , during any chemical change, the total 
mass of the products remains equal to the total mass of the reactants. The mass of 
Reactants 1 & 2 is equal to the mass of Products 1 & 2.
Reactant 1 + Reactant 2 → Product 1 + Product 2
The Law of Conservation of Mass holds true because naturally occurring elements 
are very stable at the conditions found on the surface of the Earth. In the everyday 
world of Earth, from the top of the highest mountain to the lowest point of the deepest 
ocean, atoms are not changed to other elements during ordinary chemical reactions. 
Give the correct answer for the following questions.
1. Defi	ne	the	term	‘law’.
2. What	is	a	‘scientifi	c	law’?
3. What	is	the	difference	between	a	‘scientifi	c	law’	and	a	‘scientifi	c	theory’?
4. What is a Chemical Law?
5. Who discovered the Law of Conservation of Mass?
6. State The Law of Conservation of Mass.Exercise 3.3
Experiments on The Law of Conservation of Mass 
The objective of the experiments is to practically show the application of the Law 
of Conservation of Mass in chemical reactions. These experiments could help you 
developing	a	scientifi	c	attitude,	in	working	together,	and	in	being	honest.		
Experiment 3.1 
The reaction between silver nitrate solution and dilute hydrochloric acid
HCl(aq) + AgNO3(aq) → AgCl(s) + HNO3(l)
Materials you need:	conical	ﬂ	ask, thread, cotton, test tube, safety goggles, 
gloves, balance and glass road.
Chemicals : hydrochloric acid, silver nitrate solution.
61Chemistr yGrade9 Structur eoftheAtom
Procedure: Please follow the following procedures.
1. Place	dilute	HCl	in	a	conical	ﬂ	ask	to	a	depth	of	about	1	cm.
2. Tie a thread of cotton around the top of a test tube.
3. Half	fi	ll	the	test	tube	with	silver	nitrate	solution.
4. Place	the	test	tube	inside	the	conical	ﬂ	ask	so	that	it	is	held	on	a	slant	by	the	
thread	and	place	a	bung	in	the	top	of	the	ﬂ	ask	to	hold	the	thread	in	place.
5. Weigh	the	conical	ﬂ	ask	and	contents.
6. Tilt	the	ﬂ	ask	so	that	the	silver	nitrate	solution	should	be	poured	into	the	dilute	
hydrochloric acid and a white precipitate of silver chloride is produced 
(Figure 3.2 ).
7. Reweigh	the	conical	ﬂ	ask	and	contents.
8. Remove	the	test	tube	from	the	inside	of	the	conical	ﬂ	ask.	Discard	the	contents	
of	the	conical	ﬂ	ask	into	the	waste	tank	prepared	for	this	purpose.	Discard	the	
thread, the cotton, and the gloves on the proper dust bin prepared for this 
purpose.
9. Wash	the	test	tube	and	the	conical	ﬂ	ask	and	dry	them	in	an	oven.	Put	them	
on their proper places.
Silver nitrate
Hydrochloric acid
Figure 3.2 Set up for the reaction between silver nitrate solution (AgNO3) and 
dilute hydrochloric acid (HCl).
Observation and analysis questions
1. What	is	the	mass	of	the	conical	ﬂ	ask	and	its	contents	before	the	reaction?
2. What	is	the	mass	of	the	conical	ﬂ	ask	and	its	contents	after	the	reaction?
3. Does	this	experiment	confi	rm	the	Law	of	Conservation	of	Mass?62Chemistr yGrade9 Structur eoftheAtom
Experiment 3.2 
The reaction between barium nitrate and sodium sulphate
Ba(NO3)2(aq) + Na2SO4(aq)  → BaSO4(s) + 2NaNO3(aq)
Materials : beakers (25 0 & 150 mL), Whatman	fi	lter	paper,	Erlenmeyer	ﬂ	ask,	
funnel, sand bath, metal stand, metal ring, clamps, Bunsen burner, balance, glass 
road.
Chemicals : Barium nitrate, sodium sulphate, distilled water.
Procedure: Please follow the following procedures
1. To 150 mL beaker add100 mL distilled water and 2.61 g of of Ba(NO3)2 and 
stir vigorously until it dissolves. This will make a 0.1M Ba(NO3)2 solution.
2. To 150 mL beaker add100 mL distilled water and 1.42 g of Na2SO4 and stir 
vigorously until it dissolves.
3. Mix the solutions in 250 mL beaker and stir the contents very well.
4. Filter off the white insoluble BaSO4	using	fi	lter	paper	and	dry	it	in	an	oven	at	
40 °C. Weigh the BaSO4.
5. Evaporate	the	water	from	the	fi	ltrate	on	a	sand	bath	and	weigh	the	residue	
of NaNO3. 
6. Keep the BaSO4 and NaNO3 in separate bottles, label them and put it on the 
chemical shelf.
7. Clean, dry and put the beakers on the cupboard.
Figure 3.3 Set up for the reaction between barium nitr ate (Ba(NO3)2) and sodium 
sulphate (Na2SO4).
63Chemistr yGrade9 Structur eoftheAtom
Observation and analysis questions: 
Give the correct answer for the following questions.
1. What is the mass of the barium sulphate? 
2. What is the mass of the sodium nitrate? 
3. What is the mass of the water used in the experiment?
4. Is this experiment in agreement with the Law of Conservation of Mass?
5. Express the Law of Conservation of Matter in your own words.
6. Explain	why	the	concept	of	conservation	of	matter	is	considered	a	scientifi	c	
law.
7. Potassium hydroxide (KOH) readily reacts with carbon dioxide (CO2) to 
produce potassium carbonate (K2CO3) and water (H2O). How many grams of 
potassium carbonate is produced if 224.4 g of KOH reacted with 88.0 g of 
CO2. The reaction also produced 36.0 g of water.
3.2.2 The Law of Deﬁ  nite Proportions
At	the	end	of	this	section,	you	will	be	able	to	state	the	Law	of	Defi	nite	Proportions.
Before	directly	delving	into	The	Law	of	Defi	nite	Proportions	we	shall	see	how	to	
calculate the molecular weights and moles of molecules. First we hall discuss how 
to calculate the molecular weights of molecules. In the previous unit you have come 
across the concept of average atomic mass of elements (the detail shall be discussed 
in 3.5.3). The molecular weight of a substance is the sum of the atomic masses of all 
atoms in a molecule, based on a scale in which the atomic masses of hydrogen, carbon, 
nitrogen, and oxygen are 1, 12, 14, and 16, respectively. 
Problem:  Calculate the molecular weight of ammonia (NH4). 
Solution: First calculate the atomic masses of the atoms in ammonia.
Mass of nitrogen = 14 and we have only one nitrogen atom.
Mass of hydrogen = 1 however we have four hydrogens and therefore the total mass 
of hydrogen in ammonia will be 1 x 4 = 4.
Now add all the atomic masses.
Mass of ammonia = mass of nitrogen + mass of hydrogen = 14 + 4 = 18.
The	mole	is	defi	ned	as	the	amount	of	substance	of	a	system	which	contains	as	many	
elementary	entities	as	there	are	atoms	in	0.012	kilogram	of	carbon	12;	its	symbol	is	
“mol”. One can calculate the number of moles of a compound or molecule by dividing 
the mass of the compound by its molecular mass. The number of moles will be discussed 
further in Grade 10, unit 2 under ways of expressing concentrations of solutions.64Chemistr yGrade9 Structur eoftheAtom
Number of moles =given mass      
         molecular mass 
Problem: Calculate the number of moles of 2 g of ammonia (NH4).
Solution
Number of moles =given mass of NH4
          molecular mass of NH4
      = (2 g)/(18 g) = 0.11
Law	of	Defi	nite	Proportions , also known as Proust’s Law or the Law of Constant 
Composition	states	that	every	chemical	compound	contains	fi	xed	and	constant	
proportions (by mass) of its constituent elements. To understand this, let us consider the 
following examples. 
Example 3.1 : Carb on dioxide (CO2) is composed of one carbon atom and two oxygen 
atoms.	Therefore,	by	mass,	carbon	dioxide	can	be	described	by	the	fi	xed	ratio	of	12	
(mass	of	carbon)	:	32	(mass	of	oxygen)	or	simplifi	ed	as	3:8.
Examp le 3.2 : Let us take, for example, a water molecule (H2O). Whatever the source 
of water, its composition is that of two atoms of hydrogen and one atom of oxygen. 
If we calculate the molecular weight of water, we come up with 18 g/mol. In 1 mole 
of water, there are 2 grams of hydrogen and 16 grams of oxygen. In other words, 
hydrogen	and	oxygen	are	in	a	ratio	of	1:8	in	water.	The	Law	of	Defi	nite	Proportions	
illustrates that whatever the amount of water, whether it be 2 g or 54 g, the ratio of 
the amount of hydrogen to oxygen by weight will always be the same. 
Give the correct answers for the following questions.
1. Defi	ne	Proust’s	Law	or	the	Law	of	Defi	nite	Proportions.
2. What is the ratio of hydrogen to oxygen (by weight) in 25 g H2O?
3. What is the ratio of carbon to hydrogen to oxygen (by weight) in 25 g 
ethanol (C2H6O)? Exercise 3.4
3.2.3 The Law of Multiple Proportions
At the end of this section, you will be able to state the Law of Multiple Proportions.65Chemistr yGrade9 Structur eoftheAtom
Students, form groups and discuss the following 
questions. Present your discussion points to the class.
1. Mention the two compounds that are formed from 
hydrogen and oxygen.
2. The atomic mass of hydrogen is 1 g and mass 
of oxygen is 16 g. What are the mass-ratios of 
the two elements in the compounds mentioned in 
question	#1?
3. What is a whole number? Can you give examples 
of small whole numbers?   Activity 3.4
The Law of Multiple Proportions states that, when two different compounds are formed 
from	the	same	two	elements,	the	masses	of	one	element,	which	react	with	a	fi	xed	
mass of the other, are in a ratio of small whole numbers. Let us consider the following 
examples so that we could understand this law. 
Example 3.3 : Let us consider the two compo unds formed by carbon and oxygen. In 
one	of	them	(carbon	monoxide;	CO),	we	fi	nd	1.33	g	of	oxygen	combined	with	1.00	
g	of	carbon	while	in	the	second	(carbon	dioxide;	CO2), there are 2.66 g of oxygen 
combined with 1.00 g of carbon. What is the ratio of the masses of oxygen in CO and 
CO2	that	combines	with	a	fi	xed	mass	of	carbon	(1.00	g)?
Solution : We observe the ratio of small whole numbers by dividing the masses of 
oxygen by the smallest of the two. i.e., by 1.33 
In CO (1.33 g) = 1.33/1.33 =	1;	and	in	CO2 (2.66 g) = 2.66/1.33 = 2
Therefore, the ratio of the masses of oxygen in CO and CO2 is 1:2, which is a small 
whole number. This is consistent with the atomic theory if we consider that CO contains 
one atom of carbon and one atom of oxygen whereas CO2 contains one atom of 
carbon and two atoms of oxygen. Since carbon dioxide has twice as many oxygen 
atoms bound to a carbon atom as does carbon monoxide, the weight of oxygen in 
a molecule of carbon dioxide must be twice the weight of oxygen in a molecule of 
carbon monoxide (Figure 3.4 ).66Chemistr yGrade9 Structur eoftheAtom
Figure 3.4  The law of Multiple Proportion in CO and CO2.
Example  3.4: Nitrogen forms seven different compounds with oxygen. In one of its 
compounds, it is observed that 2.62 g of nitrogen are combined with 1.50 g of 
oxygen while in another, 0.656 g of nitrogen are combined with 1.50 g of oxygen. 
Show that these data demonstrate the Law of Multiple Proportions.
Solution :
In both cases, we are dealing with a mass of nitrogen that combines with 1.50 g of 
oxygen. If these data are in agreement with the Law of Multiple Proportions, the 
ratio of the masses of nitrogen in the two compounds should be a ratio of small whole 
numbers.	Let	us,	therefore,	take	the	ratio	2.62/0.656;	dividing	the	numerator	and	
denominator by 0.656, we get 4:1, which is, indeed, a ratio of small whole numbers.
Calculate 
1. The ratio of the elements in one mole of H2O2 and H2O. Your teacher will 
provide you with a scheme that will help you answer this question.
2. The	ratio	of	molar	masses	of	N:O;
3. The	mass	of	oxygen	combining	with	1g	of	nitrogen;
4. The small whole number ratio of oxygen combining with 1g of nitrogen for 
NO, NO2, N2O, N2O4, N2O5. Your teacher will provide you with a table that 
will help you answer questions 2 to 4.Exercise 3.5
3.3   Atomic Theory
A scientifi	c	theory is an explanation of an aspect of the natural world and universe 
that	can	be	repeatedly	tested	and	verifi	ed	by	the	scientifi	c	method,	using	accepted	
protocols	of	observation,	measurement,	and	evaluation	of	results.	The	word	‘theory’ 
refers to the way how we interpret facts. Atomic Theory is, therefore, the way how 
we interpret facts about atoms. In this section we are going to discuss the historical 
development of atomic theory.67Chemistr yGrade9 Structur eoftheAtom
3.3.1 Dalton’s Atomic Theory
At the end of this section, you will be able to describe Dalton’s Atomic Theory.
Students, form groups and discuss the following 
questions. Present your discussion points to the class. 
1. Assume that you have a friend that doesn’t know 
orange. How do you describe an orange for your 
friend?
2. Describe why an orange has basically two distinct 
colors.
3. Give a title for what you have done so far about 
orange. Activity 3.5
Under section 3.1, we have discussed the concept that atoms are the fundamental 
building blocks of matter, and it dates back to very ancient times. The ideas regarding 
atoms of those times, however, had no experimental evidence and continued as mere 
speculation. These ideas, therefore, had to lay latent for a long period until the English 
man, John Dalton (Figure 3.5) proposed his atomic theory around 1803, based on 
certain observations and experimental results. 
Figure 3.5  John Dalton, an English chemist, meteorologist and physicist.
Democritus, many more scientists, philosophers, and others studied the composition of 
matter. A major leap forward in our understanding of the composition of matter took 
place in the 1800s with the work of the British scientist, John Dalton. 
Dalton studied the weights of various elements and compounds. He perceived that 
matter	is	always	combined	in	fi	xed	ratios	based	on	weight	or	volume	in	the	case	
of gases. Chemical compounds always contain the same proportion of elements by 
mass,	regardless	of	amount.	This	provided	further	support	for	Proust’s	Law	of	Defi	nite	
Proportions. Dalton also observed that there could be more than one combination of 
two elements.68Chemistr yGrade9 Structur eoftheAtom
From his experiments and observations, as well as the work from peers of his time, 
Dalton proposed a new theory of the atom. This later became known as Dalton’s 
Atomic Theory. 
Provide the correct answer for the following questions.
1. What is the difference between Democritus and Dalton in terms of 
discovering an atom?
2. State	the	fi	ve	tenets	of	Dalton’s	Atomic	Theory.
3. What led Dalton to his atomic theory?Exercise 3.6
Merits of Dalton’s Atomic Theory
The atomic theory explains the laws of chemical combination (the Law of 
Conservation of Mass and the Law of Multiple Proportions).
Dalton	was	the	fi	rst	person	to	recognize	a	workable	distinction	between	the	
fundamental particle of an element (atom) and that of a compound (molecule).
Dalton’s effort was not limited to formulating atomic theory, but he proposed symbols 
for elements and compounds (Figure 3.6 ). The symbols of elements proposed by Dalton, 
however,	were	diffi	cult	to	remember	and	draw.	Therefore,	an	alternative	method	of	
representing elements was proposed by Berzelius. He suggested alphabets could be 
used as symbols to represent elements. 
Figure 3.6  Dalton’s 1808 AD symbols and formulae.
Provide the correct answer for the following questions.
1. What are the successes of Dalton’s Atomic Theory?
2. Dalton thought that atoms are the smallest particles of matter. Scientists 
now know that atoms are composed of even smaller particles. Does this 
mean that the rest of Dalton’s Atomic Theory should be thrown away?Exercise 3.7
69Chemistr yGrade9 Structur eoftheAtom
3.3.2 Modern Atomic Theory
At the end of this section, you will be able to
describe the Modern Atomic Theory
compare and contrast Dalton’s Atomic Theory and the Modern Atomic Theory.
Students, form groups and discuss the following 
questions. Present your discussion points to the rest of 
the class.
1. Are	you	satisfi	ed	with	the	Greeks	proposal	of	the	
origin of matter? Why?
2. What do you suggest if you were asked to tell 
someone about the smallest substance from which 
matter is made up of? What are its components 
known as?
3. In your grade 8 chemistry lessons, you were learned 
about the subatomic particles. Did you know who 
and how they were discovered? Activity 3.6
The ancient Greeks proposed that matter consists of e xtremely small particles called 
atoms. Dalton postulated that each element has a characteristic type of atom that 
differs in properties from atoms of all other elements. Although the attempt made 
to describe the concept atom was good atoms were wrongly understood. Several 
other scientists were engaged in determining the essence of atoms and a better 
understanding of atoms was reached. The Modern Atomic theory establishes the 
concepts of atoms, and how they compose matter.
Development of the Modern Atomic Theory
Several scientists worked many experiments and have made various observations 
on atoms. The chronological discoveries of some of them are presented hereunder.
The presence of protons was predicted by Eugene Goldstein in his anode ray 
experiment, in 1886. 
The	fi	rst	person	who	discovered	the	electron	as	a	sub-atomic	particle	and	its	
charge to mass ratio was the British physicist, J.J. Thomson, in 1897. 
Following	this	in	1904,	Thomson	developed	the	‘Plum	pudding’	model	of	the	
atom. 
Subsequently,	in	1909,	the	American	scientist;	Robert	Millikan	found	the	charge	
and mass of the electron. 
The British physicist, Ernest Rutherford and his students Geiger and Marsden 
discovered the planetary model of an atom, in 1911. 
In 1913, Niels Bohr, a student of Rutherford’s, proposed that electrons are 
arranged in concentric circular orbits around the nucleus.70Chemistr yGrade9 Structur eoftheAtom
Subsequently, in 1920, Rutherford discovered the existence of the proton in the 
nucleus. 
In 1932, James Chadwick discovered the neutron which is another sub-atomic 
particle. 
The detailed discussions of all the af orementioned discoveries of the sub-atomic 
particles are presented in section 3.4, below. All of these discoveries proved Dalton’s 
Atomic Model wrong by revealing the following facts about atom. 
Drawbacks of Dalton’s Atomic Theory
The indivisibility of an atom was proved wrong: an atom can be further subdivided 
into protons, neutrons, and electrons. However, an atom is the smallest particle 
that takes part in chemical reactions.
According to Dalton, the atoms of the same element are similar in all respects. 
However, atoms of some elements vary in their masses and densities. These atoms 
of different masses are called isotopes. For example, chlorine has two isotopes 
with mass numbers 35 and 37.
Atoms of different elements differ in mass. This has been proven wrong in certain 
cases: argon and calcium atoms each have an atomic mass of 40 amu. These 
atoms are known as isobars.
According to Dalton, atoms of different elements combine in simple whole-number 
ratios to form compounds. This is not observed in complex organic compounds 
like sugar (C12H22O11) and protein molecules.
The discoveries of the above facts	about	atoms	led	to	the	modifi	ed	Modern	Atomic	
Theory postulates. 
Modern Atomic Theory Postulates
i. Elements are made of small particles called atoms.
ii. Atoms cannot be created or destroyed during ordinary chemical reactions.
iii. All atoms of the same element have the same atomic number but may vary in 
mass number due to the presence of different isotopes.
iv. Atoms of different elements are different. 
v. Atoms combine in small whole numbers to form compounds. 
Provide the correct answer for the following questions.
1. Compare and contrast Dalton’s Atomic theory with Modern Atomic Theory.
2. State the postulates of Modern Atomic Theory.
3. Near the end of the 18th	century,	the	fi	rst	atomic	theory	was	developed.	
Which of the following was not part of that early understanding?Exercise 3.8
71Chemistr yGrade9 Structur eoftheAtom
a. All matter is made up of atoms.
b. Elements are composed of only one type of atom.
c. Atoms can combine with other atoms to make more complex substances.
d. Electrons orbit the nucleus in electron clouds.
e. All of above concepts were understood in the 18th century.
4. What are the drawbacks of Dalton’s Atomic Theory, in your own words?
3.4   Discoveries of the Fundamental Subatomic Particles 
and the Atomic Nucleus
Following Dalton’s Atomic Theory, several scientists investigated the nature of substances. 
More	specifi	cally,	the	nature	of	the	atom.	This	section	deals	with	the	discoveries	of	the	
sub-atomic particles known as electrons, protons, neutrons, and the nucleus. 
3.4.1 Discovery of the Proton
At the end of this section, you will be able to explain the discovery of protons.
Students, form groups and discuss the following 
questions. Present your discussion points to the class. 
1. What will happen to two objects having the same 
charge, if you bring them together?
2. According to Thomson electrons are negatively 
charged particles contained by an atom. Based on 
your answer for question one what do you expect 
to happen to these electrons?
3. What	held	these	electrons	from	ﬂ	ying	away	from	
the atom?   Activity 3.7
The presence of positively charged particles in an atom has been predicted by 
Goldstein (1886) based on the electrical neutrality of an atom. The discovery of the 
proton by Goldstein was done based on the cathode ray experiment conducted by 
using a perforated cathode (Figure 3.7 ). In his experiment some rays were found to 
emanate from an anode and pass through the perforations in the cathode, without 
deﬂ	ection	by	the	cathode.	These	are	called	 anode rays or canal rays .
Now days we understand Goldstein’s experiment as follows. When an electric 
discharge is passed through the gas, some of the molecules of the gas ionised and 
produce cathode rays. Cathode rays consist of electrons. These electrons move with 
high speed towards the anode. As they move, they collide with the remaining molecules 
of the gas in the tube causing them to lose electrons resulting in positive ions. The 72Chemistr yGrade9 Structur eoftheAtom
positive ions formed are attracted by the perforated cathode. The stream of these 
positive ions causes a glow on the glass wall of the discharge tube. On the other side 
of the discharge tube, the cathode rays produce a green light. The stream of positive 
ions so formed constitutes the positive or anode rays.
High-voltage sourcePerforated cathodeRed glowPositive 
raysCathode 
rays from 
cathode
AnodePositive 
rays from 
anode 
Figure 3.7 Anode rays traveling through perforations in the cathode resulting in red 
glow on the cathode ray tube.
When the cathode ray tube contained hydrogen gas, the particles of the canal rays 
obtained were the lightest and their charge to mass ratio (e/m ratio) was the highest. 
Rutherford showed that these particles were identical to the hydrogen ion (hydrogen 
atom from which one electron has been removed). Due to this fact these particles were 
named	as	protons	and	were	shown	to	be	present	in	all	matter.	This	is	the	fi	rst	leap	
towards the discovery of the positively charged proton as part of the atomic structure. 
Today we know that the only positively charged species in an atom is the proton. 
Properties of anode rays:
i. Anode rays travel in straight lines.
ii. They consisted of material particles.
iii. They	are	deﬂ	ected	in	electric	and	magnetic	fi	eld	in	opposite	to	that	of	cathode	
rays.
iv. The nature or e/m ratio of anode rays depends upon the nature of gas present 
in the cathode ray tube.
v. They are (particles of anode rays) simply positively charged gaseous ions.
Provide the correct answer for the following questions.
1. Defi	ne	anode	rays	or	canal	rays.
2. What is the other name of anode rays?
3. Mention the properties of anode rays.Exercise 3.9
73Chemistr yGrade9 Structur eoftheAtom
3.4.2 Discovery of the Electron
At the end of this section, you will be able to explain the discovery of electron.
Students form groups and discuss the following 
questions. Present your discussion points to the class. 
1. What happens to the electric bulb when you turn on 
the switch in your home?
2. What do you think happened inside the bulb?
3. Why do some electric bulbs give yellowish light 
and others white light? Activity 3.8
The Crooke’s Discharge Tube or Cathode Ray Tube
In 1855, the German inventor Heinrich Geissler developed the mercury pump and 
produced	the	fi	rst	good	vacuum	tubes.	These	tubes,	as	modifi	ed	by	Sir	William	Crookes,	
became	the	fi	rst	to	produce	cathode	rays,	leading	eventually	to	the	discovery	of	the	
electron.	Sir	William	Crookes	was	the	fi	rst	scientist	who	designed	the	discharge	tube	
which was called the Crooke’s Discharge Tube or Cathode Ray Tube . The discharge 
tube consists of a glass tube from which most of the air has been evacuated having 
two metal plates sealed at both ends. These metal plates are called electrodes . 
These electrodes are connected to positive and negative terminals of a battery. The 
electrode connected to the positive terminal is known as anode  and the electrode 
connected to the negative terminal is known as cathode (Figure 3.8 ).
+_Cathode
Cathode rays
High-voltage sources Exhaust pumpAnode
Figure 3.8  The Crooke’s Discharge Tube or Cathode Ray Tube.
The	electrodes	are	connected	to	high	voltage	for	the	current	to	ﬂ	ow.	The	high	voltage
provides energy for the atoms of a gas to further split or break up. When both 
electrodes	are	connected	to	high	voltage,	current	starts	ﬂ	owing.	At	high	pressure	
no	electricity	ﬂ	ows	through	the	air	in	the	discharge	tube,	so	low	pressure	is	used.	
Low pressure helps in conduction of electricity. At high voltage of 10,000 volts and 
at normal atmospheric pressure there is no effect. But keeping the same voltage if 74Chemistr yGrade9 Structur eoftheAtom
pressure is reduced to 0.01 mm of Hg, a greenish glow was observed at anode. The 
rays are emitted from the direction of the cathode, and are called cathode rays . A  
good example of a cathode ray would be a ﬂ	uorescent	bulb in your home (Figure 
3.9). 
Figure 3.9	Compact	ﬂ	uorescent	lamps.
The electron was one of the fundamental subatomic particle that was discovered by 
the British physicist, J.J. Thomson, in 1897.  In the discovery of electrons J. J. Thomson 
performed several experiments which are presented below.
Thomson’s Experiment on the Path of Cathode Rays
J. J. Thomson conducted some experiments with a discharge tube for studying the 
properties	of	cathode	rays.	The	fi	rst	experiment	he	has	done	is	studying	how	cathode	
rays travel in the discharge tube by placing a small object between the cathode 
and the anode. The formation of a shadow of the object on the opposite side of 
the cathode revealed that the cathode rays travel in straight lines. The cathode rays 
travel towards the node because they are attracted by the positively charged anode. 
When an object is placed opposite to the direction of the cathode rays, a sharp 
shadow having the shape of the object is formed on the surface of the discharge tube 
glass. This concludes that cathode rays travel in straight lines (Figure 3.10 ).
Metal object
High-voltage sourcesAnodeShadow of object
Cathode
+_
Figure 3.10  Cathode rays creating a shadow of small object on the cathode ray tube 
screen.
Thomson’s Exper iment on the Particle Na ture of the Cathode Rays
J. J. Thomson’s second experiment was performed by placing a light paddle wheel 75Chemistr yGrade9 Structur eoftheAtom
between cathode and anode to study the particulate nature of the cathode rays 
(Figure 3.11 ).  He expected to see if the cathode rays could move the paddle wheel. 
If they do so, then they have a particle nature. He observed the rotation of the light 
paddle wheel which revealed that the cathode rays are small particles having mass 
and kinetic energy.
AnodeLight paddle wheel
Cathode
High-voltage sources
Figure 3.11  Cathode rays rotating light paddle wheel b etween cathode and anode.
When catho de rays are allowed to fall on a paddle wheel, it rotates. This is possible 
only when the rays striking it have some material particles. From this, it can be 
concluded that cathode rays consist of some material particles. Today we know that 
the electron has both particle and wave nature (the wave nature of electrons will be 
discussed in grade 11). Its weight, however, is too small compared to the other sub-
atomic particles. Therefore Thomson’s contribution to the modern atomic structure is 
signifi	cant	in	this	regard.
Thomson’s Experiment on  the Charge of the Cathode Ray
William	Crookes	experimented	with	cathode	rays	and	magnets	for	the	fi	rst	time.	His	
observations	on	the	deﬂ	ection	of	the	rays	by	magnetic	fi	elds	led	him	to	conclude	
that they were composed of negatively charged molecules. Years later J. J. Thomson 
determined the molecules hypothesized by Crookes were actually negatively charged 
subatomic particles that he called corpuscles, but which were eventually named 
electrons . 
J. J. Thomson performed the third experiment to investigate the charge of the cathode  
ray	by	passing	cathode	rays	through	electric	and	magnetic	fi	elds	(Figures 3.12  & 
3.13).	Upon	passing	through	an	electric	fi	eld,	the	cathode	rays	bent	towards	the	
positive plate. This proved that cathode rays are negatively charged particles. 
Thomson	concluded	that	the	particles	had	a	net	negative	charge;	these	particles	are	
now called electrons. We know from our knowledge of electricity, in physics, when an 
electric	fi	eld	is	applied	perpendicularly	to	the	path	of	a	negatively	charged	species,	
they	deﬂ	ect	towards	positive	plate.	As	opposite	charges	attract,	the	cathode	ray	
particles are negatively charged. Today we know that the only negatively charged 
fundamental particle of an atom is the electron. JJ Thomson’s contribution is immense 
in this regard.76Chemistr yGrade9 Structur eoftheAtom
Anode
++_
_Fluorescent
material
(ZnS)
Electric	fi	eldCathode
H.V.Bright spot 
Figure 3.12	Cathode	rays	bend	passing	through	electric	fi	eld.
Passing cathode rays through mag netic	fi	eld	applied	perpendicular	to	the	path	of	
the cathode rays (Figure 3.13 ).	This	resulted	in	the	deﬂ	ection	of	the	cathode	rays	
perpendicular	to	the	applied	magnetic	fi	eld.	 From our electromagnetism lessons, 
in	physics,	we	know	that	a	moving	electric	charge	generates	a	magnetic	fi	eld.	A	
magnetic	fi	eld	induces	electric	charge	movement,	producing	an	electric	current.	In	an	
electromagnetic	wave,	the	electric	fi	eld	and	magnetic	fi	eld	are	perpendicular	to	one	
another.	When	the	magnetic	fi	eld	is	applied	perpendicularly	to	the	path	of	cathode	
rays,	they	get	deﬂ	ected	towards	the	north	pole	of	the	magnet	which	is	expected	of	
negatively	charged	particles.	This	further	confi	rms	that	cathode	rays	are	negatively	
charged.
Anode
+_Fluorescent
material
(ZnS)
magnetic	fi	eldCathode
H.V.Bright spot S 
N 
Figure 3.13	Cathode	rays	bend	passing	through	a	magnetic	fi	eld.
Thomson carried out the above experiments with different gases, at low pressure to 
decrease the interaction between gas molecules, in the discharge tube. No change in 
the properties of the cathode rays was observed despite the use of different gases 
in the discharge tube. 
J. J. Thomson proved that atoms were not the most basic form of matter. He 
demonstrated that cathode rays could move a paddle wheel placed between two 
electrodes,	could	be	deﬂ	ected,	or	bent,	by	magnetic	or	electric	fi	elds,	which	indicated	
that cathode rays consist of charged particles. More important, by measuring the 
extent	of	the	deﬂ	ection	of	the	cathode	rays	in	magnetic	or	electric	fi	elds	of	various	
strengths, Thomson was able to calculate the mass-to-charge ratio of the particles to 
be 1.76 x 108 C/g. These particles were emitted by the negatively charged cathode 
and	repelled	by	the	negative	terminal	of	an	electric	fi	eld.	Because	like	charges	repel	
each other and opposite charges attract, Thomson concluded that the particles had a 
net	negative	charge;	these	particles	are	now	called	electrons.	77Chemistr yGrade9 Structur eoftheAtom
Provide the correct answer for the following questions.
1. Why was the ray bended? Shadow seen? The paddle rotated?
2. Why did Thomson take gas at low pressure   while conducting the 
experiments?
3. How did Thomson discover the particle nature of electrons?
4. What happened to the cathode rays when they were allowed to pass 
through	electric	and	magnetic	fi	elds?	What	does	this	prove?Exercise 3.10
J. J. Thomson’s Atomic Model
Students, form a group and discuss the following 
questions. Present your discussion points to the class. 
1. What is your understanding about atomic model? 
2. According to Democritus, what would an atom look 
like? 
3. What do you expect Dalton’s Atomic Model to be 
like,	based	on	his	experimental	fi	ndings?  Activity 3.9
Following the discovery of the electron, J.J. Thomson developed what became known 
as	the	‘plum	pudding’	model	in	1904	(Figure 3.14 ). Plum pudding is an English dessert 
similar	to	a	blueberry	muffi	n.	In	Thomson’s	plum	pudding	model	of	the	atom,	the	
electrons were embedded in a uniform sphere of positive charge like blueberries 
stuck	into	a	muffi	n.	The	positive	matter	was	thought	to	be	jelly-like	or	similar	to	a	thick	
soup. The electrons were somewhat mobile. As they got closer to the outer portion 
of the atom, the positive charge in the region was greater than the neighbouring 
negative charges, and the electron would be pulled back more toward the centre 
region of the atom. The best example of locally available material for Thomson’s 
Model is watermelon. The seeds of the watermelon would mimic the electrons, and the 
watery soft reddish part is the positively charged matter ( Figure 3.14 ).
  
   
Figure 3.14  J. J. Thomson’s	atomic	model	(left);	the	“plum pudding”	model	(centre);	
watermelon (right). 78Chemistr yGrade9 Structur eoftheAtom
Validity of Thomson’s Atomic Model
Thomson’s Atomic Model could successfully explain the electrical neutrality of an atom. 
It, however, failed to explain how the positively charged particles are shielded from 
the negatively charged electrons without getting neutralized. Today we know that the 
positively charged protons exist in the nucleus of an atom which of course is at the 
centre of the atomic structure and the electrons are revolving around them. Therefore, 
Thomson’s prediction is not negligible although it lacks some knowledge.
Millikan’s Oil Drop Experiment
Subsequently, an American scientist, Robert Millikan (1909) carried out a series of 
experiments	using	electrically	charged	oil	droplets.	In	this	experiment	some	fi	ne	oil	
droplets were allowed to be sprayed into the chamber by an atomizer. The air in the 
chamber is subjected to ionization by X-rays. The electrons produced by the ionization 
of	air	attach	themselves	to	the	oil	drops.	When	a	suffi	cient	amount	of	electric	fi	eld	is	
applied, which can just balance the gravitational force acting on an oil drop, the drop 
remains suspended in the air. 
From this experiment, Millikan observ ed that the smallest charge found on the cathode 
rays was approximately 1.59 x 10-19 coulombs, and the charge on each drop was 
always an integral multiple of that value. Based on this observation, he concluded that 
1.59 x 10-19 coulomb is the smallest possible charge, and considered that value as 
the charge of the electron. With this information and Thomson’s charge-to-mass ratio 
(1.76 x 108C/g), Millikan determined the mass of an electron (Figure 3.15 ):
Mass of electron =e    
        e/m  
1.59 x 10-19C  = 9 x 10-28g
  1.76 x 108 C/g
Oil spray
Atomizer ro produce 
oil droplets
Microscope
Electrical charged platesX rays produce 
charges on 
the oil drops(+)
(_)
Figure 3.15  The apparatus used by Millikan to determine the charge of an electron.
From our understanding of electricity today, it is obvious that the force on any electric 
charge	in	an	electric	fi	eld	is	equal	to	the	product	of	the	charge	and	the	electric	fi	eld.	79Chemistr yGrade9 Structur eoftheAtom
Millikan was able to measure both the amount of electric force and magnitude of 
electric	fi	eld	on	the	tiny	charge	of	an	isolated	oil	droplet.	From	this	data	he	determined	
the magnitude of the charge itself.
Summary of the properties of cathode rays:
They travel in a straight line from the cathode and cast shadows of metallic 
objects placed in their path.
They	cause	mechanical	motion	of	small	puddle-wheel	placed	in	their	path;	they	
possess kinetic energy and must be material particles.
Their properties are independent of the electrodes, and the gas present in the 
cathode ray tube.
The charge/mass ratio of the rays is constant.
Upon	passing	through	electric	fi	eld,	the	cathode	rays	bend	towards	the	positive	
plate showing that they are negatively charged.
Cathode	rays	are	negatively	charged	and	affected	by	magnetic	fi	eld.
Cathode rays affect ZnS screen. When cathode rays are allowed to strike ZnS 
screen,	they	produce	a	faint	greenish	ﬂ	uorescence.
Cathode rays ionises the gases. When cathode rays are allowed to pass through 
gases, different glows are seen in the tube. These different glows are due to the 
ionisation of gases.
Cathode rays have penetrating power. When cathode rays are allowed to pass 
through thin metal foils, a glow is seen behind the metal foil indicating that they 
have good penetrating power.
Cathode rays produce X-rays. When cathode rays are allowed to fall on metals 
such as tungsten, copper, X-rays are observed.
Provide the correct answer for the following questions.
1. Mass of the electron is calculated from ____________ and __________ 
values of electron.
2. Describe Millikan’s oil drop experiment in brief.
3. Describe J. J. Thomson’s Atomic Model.
4. According to _________, the charges in an atom are arranged like the 
pulp and seeds of a watermelon.Exercise 3.11
3.4.3 Discovery of the Nucleus
At the end of this section, you will be able to explain the discovery of the nucleus.80Chemistr yGrade9 Structur eoftheAtom
Students, form groups and discuss the following questions. 
Present your discussion points to the class.
1. From your grade 8 science lessons you know that the 
planets revolve around the Sun, in the Solar System. 
Assume that you have made a model of the Solar 
System from locally available materials by representing 
the planets and the Sun by stones. If you hang the model 
and throw a small stone towards it, is it always possible 
to hit the stones that represent the planets and the Sun? 
If your answer is no why? If your answer is yes how?
2. What do you think will happen to the probability of 
hitting the Sun if the number of stones you throw at the 
same time is 5? Does it increase or decrease? Why?
3. What will happen to those stones that hit the Sun in 
question three? What about those that did not hit the 
sun? Activity 3.10
By 1920, with the discovery of electron and proton, it was thought that the inner 
structure	of	the	atom	was	complete.	The	mass	of	the	electron	is	negligible;	hence	the	
mass of atom should be equal to the mass of protons concentrated inside the nucleus. 
Different atoms have different number of protons, hence different atomic masses. 
However, it was observed that there was a discrepancy between the actual atomic 
mass and the calculated atomic mass.
For example, an atom of carbon has 6 protons;	therefore	its	mass	should	be	six	times	
the mass of hydrogen atom which has one proton. But, experimentally, it was found 
that the mass of carbon atoms is twelve times the mass of hydrogen atom. A similar 
problem was encountered with regard to the mass of other atoms. Then, what was the 
reason for this discrepancy?
Rutherford	was	the	fi	rst scientist to predict the reason for this discrepancy. He predicted 
that along with protons, there were some other neutral particles present inside the 
nucleus. In a single famous experiment, the British physicist Ernest Rutherford showed 
explicitly that Thomson’s model of the atom was incorrect. He used α-particles in his 
experiment. α-particles are composite particles consisting of two protons and two 
neutrons tightly bound together. In 1920, Rutherford targeted a stream of positively 
charged α particles at a very thin gold foil target (Figure 3.17a ) and inspected 
how the α particles were scattered by the foil. The particles were produced by a 
sample of radium. Gold was chosen since it could be easily hammered into very thin 
sheets, minimizing the number of atoms in the target. If Thomson’s model of the atom 
were correct, the positively charged α-particles should smash through the regularly 
dispersed mass of the gold target like cannonballs (see Figure 3.16 ).81Chemistr yGrade9 Structur eoftheAtom
Figure 3.16  A regularly distributed cannonballs.
They might be traveling a little slower when they appeared, but they should pass 
essentially straight through the target (Figure 3.17b ). However, a small fraction of the 
α	particles	were	deﬂ	ected	at	large	angles,	and	some	were	reﬂ	ected	directly	back	at	
the source ( Figure 3.17c ).
Lead container
RadiumStream of α particles α particles Gold atoms
Gold atomsPositively charged 
nucleus Thin gold foil(b) What Rutherford expected if 
Thomson’s model were correct
(b) What Rutherford actually 
observed(a) Rutherford’s experiment Photographic	fi	lm	of	
luminescent screen
Figure 3.17  A Summary of Rutherford’s Experiments.
Rutherford’s results were not consistent with Dalton’s atomic model in which the mass and 
positive charge are distributed uniformly throughout the volume of an atom. Instead, 
they strongly suggested that both the mass and positive charge are concentrated in a 
tiny minute fraction of the volume of an atom, which Rutherford called the nucleus . It 
made sense that a small fraction of the α particles collided bumped with the dense, 
positively	charged	nuclei.	This	resulted	in	large	deﬂ	ections,	or	almost	head-on,	causing	
them	to	be	reﬂ	ected	straight	back	at	the	source.
Rutherford’s explanation for the stability of nucleus and atom: After the success of 
bringing out a successful atomic model, Rutherford was cornered by the other scientists 
by the question: “Why does the nucleus not disintegrate in spite of repulsion among 
the protons?” To explain the stability of the nucleus, Rutherford predicted the presence 
of neutral particles. The presence of these neutrons between the protons neutralises 82Chemistr yGrade9 Structur eoftheAtom
the repulsion among the protons. Rutherford predicted the presence of the neutron 
even before it was discovered, which he proved it later on.
Coming to the stability of the atom, he explained that the revolving electron is under 
the	inﬂ	uence	of	two	types	of	forces.	
i. The electrostatic force of attraction between the nucleus and the electron and
ii. The centrifugal force directed away from the revolving electron.
These two forces are equal and opposite and hence keep the electron in equilibrium in 
the path. This is the reason why electrons do not fall into the nucleus in spite of inward 
nuclear pull, according to Rutherford.
Today, it is known that strong nuclear forces, which are much stronger than electrostatic 
interactions, hold the protons and the neutrons together in the nucleus. For this and 
other insights, Rutherford was awarded the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1908.
Rutherford’s Atomic Model
The atom is mostly composed of empty space. The whole positive charge and mass 
of the atom are concentrated in a small central part known as the nucleus. The size 
of the nucleus is so small that its diameter is 105 times less than that of an atom. The 
diameter of the nucleus has been estimated by Rutherford as 10-13 cm in contrast to 
that of an atom to be 10-8 cm. The electrons existing outside the nucleus rotate around 
the nucleus with high .
Velocities to counterbalance the electrostatic forces of attraction between protons and 
electrons. Rutherford’s atomic model bear a resemblance to the planetary motion in 
the solar system (grade 8). Rutherford’s model of an atom is, therefore, also called the 
Planetary Model (see Figure 3.18 ).
Nucleus 
Electron  
Figure 3.18 Rutherford’s Model of an Atom	in	contrast	to	the	Planetary	Model	(left);	
the	‘Nuclear	Atom	Model’	(right).
Rutherford’s Atomic Model also beca me known as the nuclear model. In the nuclear 
atom, the protons and neutrons, which contain nearly all of the mass of the atom, are 
situated in the nucleus at the centre of the atom. The electrons are dispersed around 
the nucleus and occupy most of the volume of the atom. It is worth stressing just how 83Chemistr yGrade9 Structur eoftheAtom
small	the	nucleus	is	compared	to	the	rest	of	the	atom.	If	we	could	inﬂ	ate	an	atom	to	
be the size of a large professional football stadium, the nucleus would be about the 
size of a cat’s eye.
Rutherford’s Model proved to be	an	signifi	cant	step	towards	a	full	understanding	of	
the atom. It did not, however, fully address the nature of the electrons, and  how they 
reside in the vast space around the nucleus. It was not until some years far ahead 
that a full understanding of the electron was realized. This proved to be the key to 
understanding the chemical properties of elements.
Rutherford’s experiments discovered the following aspects of the nucleus:
The nucleus of an atom is positively charged.
Most of the mass of an atom is concentrated in the nucleus.
There are large spaces within an atom.
Legitimacy of Rutherford’s Atomic Model
Rutherford’s Atomic Model could wonderfully explain the presence of a positively 
charged nucleus and the presence of electrons outside the nucleus in an atom. The 
failure of Rutherford’s theory, however, stemmed from two major objections:
This model is inconsistent to the principle of classical electro-dynamics. According 
to this, any charged particle in circular motion releases energy uninterruptedly. 
The electron being a charged particle in circular motion loses energy. This should 
fi	nally	result	in	its	curved	path	towards	the	nucleus	and	the	atom	should	then	
collapse.
The second major objection to Rutherford’s model came from the pattern of 
atomic spectra. The detailed explanation of this would be dealt with in the 
syllabi in grade 11.
Provide the correct answer for the following questions.
1. Why is Rutherford’s Model called the nuclear model?
2. Who discovered the protons? Based on what experiment was he able to 
discover these protons?
3. According to Rutherford’s Atomic Model, where are the protons and 
electrons located in an atom?
4. What are the drawbacks of Rutherford’s Atomic Model?
5. Describe Rutherford’s Atomic Model.
6. If Rutherford’s Atomic Model is correct, then the atom should collapse.  
Explain?Exercise 3.12
The Niels Bohr Atomic Model
In 1913, a Danish scientist, Niels Bohr could overcome the limitation of Rutherford’s 84Chemistr yGrade9 Structur eoftheAtom
atomic model effectively based on the Quantum Theory of Radiation proposed by 
Max Planck. The concept of Quantum Theory is, however, beyond the scope of this 
subject. You will learn about it in grade 11. At this level, we will only present the 
principles associated with Bohr’s Atomic Model.
Bohr, a student of  Rutherford’s, developed a new model of the atom. The Bohr Model 
can	be	summarized	by	the	following	fi	ve	principles:
Electrons are arranged in concentric circular orbits around the nucleus (see Figure 
3.19).
Electrons occupy only certain orbits around the nucleus. Those orbits are stable 
and are called ‘stationary’	orbits	or	shells .
Each	orbit	or	shell	is	associated	with	a	defi	nite	fi	xed	amount	of	energy.	Hence	
these are also called energy levels and are designated K, L, M, N respectively.
The energy associated with a certain energy level increases with the increase of 
its distance from the nucleus. Hence if the energy associated with the K, L, M, N 
shells are E1, E2, E3, . . . . , etc. respectively, then E1 < E2 < E3, . . . . , etc.
As long as the electron revolves in a particular orbit, the electron does not lose 
its energy.  
Figure 3.19 Neil Bohr’s Atomic Model.
Provide the correct answer for the following questions.
1. Which model can be described as negatively charged electrons orbiting 
a	positively	charged	nucleus	in	defi	nite	paths?
a. The Bohr Model.
b. The J.J. Thomson Model.
c. The Rutherford Model.d. The Democritus Model.
e. The Leucippus Model.
2. The circular paths in which electrons revolve are called __________.
3. On what basis did Bohr propose his atomic model?
4. What are the orbits and why are they called stationary orbits?
5. Explain Bohr’s Atomic Model.Exercise 3.13
85Chemistr yGrade9 Structur eoftheAtom
3.4.4 Discovery of the Neutron
At the end of this section, you will be able to explain the discovery of neutron.
Students, form groups and discuss the following points. 
Present your discussion points to the class.
1. From your physics lessons you know that like charges 
repel each other. So, how do the positively charged 
protons exist in harmony in the tiny nucleus?Activity 3.11
After the discovery of the proton, physicists had predicted that there were likely other 
particles in the atomic nucleus. This was seen from the fact that elements heavier than 
hydrogen had a larger atomic mass than their atomic number (the number of protons). 
Theories for the additional particles included additional protons whose charge was 
shielded by electrons in the nucleus or an unknown neutral particle. In 1932, French 
physicists, Frederic and Irene Joliot-Curie bombarded beryllium nuclei with α particles 
and observed that unknown radiation was released that in turn ejected protons from 
the nuclei of various substances. Alpha particles, also called α rays or α radiation,
consist of two protons and two neutrons bound together into a particle identical to 
a helium-4 nucleus. They are emitted from the nucleus of some radio nuclides (e.g., 
Polonium) during a form of radioactive decay, called α-decay . The Joliot-Curies 
hypothesized that this radiation was γ-rays .
Figure 3.20  James Chadwick’s beryllium bombardment experiment.
The English physicist, James Chadwick (Figure 3.21 ) was convinced that α particles did 
not	have	suffi	cient	energy	to	produce	such	powerful	 γ-rays. During an experiment it 
was found that, when α-particles bombarded Beryllium nuclei, some radiations were
observed.	These	radiations	were	found	to	be	undeﬂ	ected	in	an	electric	fi	eld.	So,	the	
earlier scientist thought these radiations could be γ-rays and hence discarded it. But 
Chadwick repeated the experiment and made the following observations.
i. A paddle wheel was placed behind the Beryllium nucleus and the nucleus was 
bombarded with α-particles. It was observed that the paddle wheel rotates. From 86Chemistr yGrade9 Structur eoftheAtom
this, it was concluded that the beryllium nucleus emits some invisible radiations 
having material particles.
ii. When	these	invisible	radiations	were	allowed	to	pass	through	an	electric	fi	eld,	
there	was	no	deviation	seen.	This	confi	rmed	the	fact	that	these	rays	contained	
neutral particles. These neutral particles were called neutrons by James Chadwick.
That discovery provided a new tool for making atomic disintegration, since neutrons, 
being	electrically	uncharged,	could	enter	undeﬂ	ected	into	the	atomic	nucleus,	and	led	
to a new model of the atomic nucleus being composed of protons and neutrons (Figure 
3.22). Neutrons could be captured by hydro-carbons or wax as shown in Figure 3.20 .
   
    
Figure 3.21 J.J. Thomson (left), Ernest Rutherford (centre), and James Chadwick (right). 
The discovery of fundamental particles has ultimately resulted in the formation of 
a basic atomic model. The basic model of an atom encompasses a small positively 
charged nucleus (where protons and neutrons reside) at the centre of the atom and 
the electrons revolving around the nucleus in orbits.
Figure 3.22  James Chadwick’s Atomic Model.87Chemistr yGrade9 Structur eoftheAtom
Provide the correct answer for the following questions.
1. Who discovered the neutrons?
2. Neutrons were discovered by bombarding beryllium with ___________.
3. Why the presence of the neutrons in an atom was predicted? 
4. How were the neutrons discovered?Exercise 3.14
3.5   Composition of an Atom and the Isotopes
Atoms hav e different properties based on the arrangement and the number of their 
sub-atomic particles. Some elements have the same number of protons, but a different 
number of neutrons. This resulted in same elements having different masses, which 
in turn led to different properties. In this section, we are going to discuss about the 
electrons, the protons, and the neutrons in relation to the atomic structure, mass, and 
charge. We will also discuss about isotopes.
3.5.1 Electrons, Protons and Neutrons
At the end of this section, you will be able to
Write	the	relative	charges	of	an	electron	a	proton	and	a	neutron;
Tell the absolute and relative masses of an electron, a proton and a neutron.
Students, form groups and discuss the following 
questions. Present your discussion points to the class 
when asked by your teacher.
1. From your previous lessons you understood that the 
mass of proton and neutron is far exceeding the 
mass of an electron. What local materials can you 
give as an example that represents these three sub-
atomic particles?
2. Can you describe how these three sub-atomic 
particles coexist in an atom, by considering their 
charge and mass?Activity 3.12
Electrons
Electrons are one of three fundamental particles that make up the atoms (Figure 3.24 ). 
Electrons are extremely small (Figure 3.23 ). The mass of an electron is only about 
1/2000 the mass of a proton or a neutron, which is about 0.00054897 amu or 9 
x 10-31 Kg. So, electrons contribute almost nothing to the total mass of an atom. The 
electric charge of an electron is −1, which is equal but opposite to the charge of a 88Chemistr yGrade9 Structur eoftheAtom
proton. All atoms have identical number of electrons and protons, so the positive and 
negative	charges	‘cancel	out’	making	atoms	electrically	neutral.
Figure 3.23  Comparison of an electron (penny or cent) with proton (bowling ball).
The Protons
The proton is one of the three sub-atomic particles that make up the atom. Protons 
are found in the nucleus of the atom (Figure 3.24 ). Proton is a tiny, compact region at 
the center of the atom. Protons have a positive electrical charge of one (+1) and a 
mass of 1.0073 atomic mass unit (amu), which is about 1.67×10-27 Kg. Together with 
neutrons, they make up virtually all of the mass of an atom.
The Neutrons
Atoms of all elements apart from most atoms of hydrogen, have neutrons in their 
nucleus (Figure 3.24 ). Unlike the protons and the electrons, which are electrically 
charged, neutrons have no charge. That’s why the neutrons in Table 3.1 are labeled 
n°.	The	zero	stands	for	‘zero	charge’.	The	mass	of	a	neutron	(1.0087	amu)	is	a	little	
greater than the mass of a proton, which is 1 atomic mass unit (amu). An atomic mass 
unit equals about 1.67×10-27 Kg. A neutron also has about the same diameter as a 
proton, or 1.7×10-15 meters.
Figure 3.24  The sub atomic particles.
Table 3.1 Physical properties of sub atomic particles.
Particle Symbol Charge 
(coulombs)Mass (Kg) Relative 
chargeMass 
(amu)Location
Proton P++1.59x10-191.673x10-27+1 1.0073 Inside the nucleus
Neutron n0No charge 1.675x10-270 1.0087 Inside the nucleus
Electron e--1.59x10-199x10-31-1 5.4858 x 
10-4Outside the 
nucleus89Chemistr yGrade9 Structur eoftheAtom
Provide the correct answer for the following questions.
1. Tell the mass and charge of the fundamental particles of an atom.
2. Compare the masses of protons and neutrons.
3. Compare the charges of electrons and protons.
4. Neutrons	are	neither	attracted	to	nor	repelled	from	the	objects;	they	don’t	
interact with protons or electrons.  Explain?
5. Why is the mass of an atom depends only on the mass of protons and 
neutrons?Exercise 3.15
3.5.2 Atomic Number and Mass Numb er
At the end of this section, you will be able to
tell the number of protons and electrons in an atom from the atomic number of 
the element
determine the number of  neutrons from given values of atomic numbers and mass 
numbers
Students, form groups and discuss the following 
questions. Present your discussion points to the class.
1. How do elements arrange in the periodic table?
2. In the previous section we have discussed about the 
masses of electrons, protons and neutrons. So, which 
particles account for the mass of an atom?
3. How is it possible to distinguish atoms of one 
element from atoms of another element?   Activity 3.13
It is important to be able to differentiate atoms of one element from atoms of another 
element. Elements are pure substances that make up all other matter, so each one is 
given a different name. From your grade 7 science lessons you know that the names 
of elements are represented by unique one- or two-letter symbols, such as H for 
hydrogen, C for carbon, or He for helium. However, it would be more authoritative 
if these names could be used to identify the numbers of protons and neutrons in the 
atoms. That’s where atomic numbers and mass numbers are useful.
Scientists are always interested in atomic number and how it differs between different 
elements since an atom of one element can be distinguished from an atom of another 
element by the number of protons in its nucleus. The number of protons in an atom is 
called its atomic number (Z). This number is very important because it is unique for 90Chemistr yGrade9 Structur eoftheAtom
atoms of a given element. All atoms of an element have identical number of protons, 
and every element has a diverse number of protons in its atoms (Table 3.2 ). If an atom 
has only one proton, we know that it’s a hydrogen atom. An atom with two protons 
is always a helium atom. If scientists count four protons in an atom, they know it’s a 
beryllium	atom.	An	atom	with	three	protons	is	a	lithium	atom,	an	atom	with	fi	ve	protons	
is a boron atom, an atom with six protons is a carbon atom . . . the list goes on.
Table 3.2	Atoms	of	the	fi	rst	six	elements.
Name Protons Neutrons Electrons Atomic 
Number (Z)Mass 
Number (A)
Hydrogen 1 0 1 1 1
Helium 2 2 2 2 4
Lithium 3 4 3 3 7
Beryllium 4 5 4 4 9
Boron 5 6 5 5 11
Carbon 6 6 6 6 12
Of course, since neutral atoms have the same number of electrons to that of proton, 
an element’s atomic number also tells you how many electrons are in a neutral atom 
of that element. Atoms are neutral in electrical charge because they have the same 
number of negative electrons as positive protons (Table 3.2). For example, hydrogen 
has an atomic number of 1. This means that an atom of hydrogen has one proton, 
and, if it’s neutral, has one electron as well. Carbon, on the other hand, has an atomic 
number of 6, which means that an atom of carbon has 6 protons, and, if it’s neutral, 
has 6 electrons as well.
Mass Number
The mass number (A) of an atom is the total number of protons and neutrons in its 
nucleus. It is also known as the total number of nucleons in the atom’s nucleus. Do 
not confuse atomic mass with mass number because it is the average weight of an 
element. Counting the number of protons and neutrons tells scientists about the total 
mass of an atom.
Mass number A = (number of protons) + (number of neutrons)
An atom’s mass number is very easy to calculate, provided that you know the number 
of protons and neutrons in an atom.
Example 3.5 : What is the mass number of an atom of helium that contains 2 neutrons?
Solution
(Number of protons) = 2 (Remember that an atom of helium always has 2 protons)
(Number of neutrons) = 2
Mass number = (number of protons) + (number of neutrons)91Chemistr yGrade9 Structur eoftheAtom
Mass number = 2 + 2 = 4
Example 3.6 : How many protons, electrons, and neutrons are in an atom of K (mass 
number of 40)?
Solution
Atomic number = (number of protons) = 19
For all atoms with no charge, the number of electrons is equal to the number of protons.
Therefore, number of protons = number of electrons = 19
The mass number, 40, is the sum of the number of protons and the neutrons.
To	fi	nd	the	number	of	neutrons,	subtract	the	number	of	protons	from	the	mass	number.
Number of neutrons = 40 - 19 = 21
Example 3.7:  What is the atomic number, number of electrons, and neutrons in an 
atom of zinc having a mass number of 65 and 30 protons?
Solution
Number of protons = Atomic number = 30
For all atoms with no charge, the number of electrons is equal to the number of protons.
Number of protons = Number of electrons = 30
The mass number, 65, is the sum of the number of protons and the neutrons.
To	fi	nd	the	number	of	neutrons,	subtract	the	number	of	protons	from	the	mass	number.
Number of neutrons = 65 - 30 = 35
Representation of Mass Number and Atomic Number in a Nuclear Symbol of an 
Element
There is a common way in which scientists commonly express the mass number and the 
atomic number of an atom. To write a nuclear symbol, the mass number is placed at 
the upper left (superscript) of the chemical symbol, and the atomic number is placed 
at the lower left (subscript) of the symbol. 
XA
Z
NChemical symbol 
for the element 
= neutron numberAtomic number = 
number of protonsMass number =     
A = Z + N
Example 3.8 : The complete nuclear symbol for hydrogen mass number 1, helium mass 
number 4, lithium mass number 7, beryllium mass number 9, boron mass number 11 
and carbon mass number 12 is given below:92Chemistr yGrade9 Structur eoftheAtom
H,1
1He,4
2Li,7
3Be,9
4B,11
5C12
6
In the carbon nucleus represented above, the atomic number 6 indicates that the 
nucleus contains 6 protons, and therefore, it must contain 6 neutrons to have a mass 
number of 12. The beryllium nucleus has 4 protons and 5 neutrons in order to have a 
mass of 9.
Provide the correct answer for the following questions.
1. Which of the following pairs has almost similar masses?
a. Proton and electron  
b. Neutron and electron
c. Electron and hydrogen(protium) 
d. Neutron and hydrogen (protium)
2. Aluminium has 13 protons and 14 neutrons. What is its mass number?
3. Silicone’s mass number is 28 and its atomic number is 14. What is its 
proton and neutron number?
4. Chlorine has 18 neutrons and it has a mass number of 35. What is its 
proton number?
5. Write the nuclear symbol of aluminium, silicon and chlorine.Exercise 3.16
3.5.3 Atomic Mass and Isotope
At the end of this section, you will be able to
explain	the	terms	atomic	mass	and	isotope;
calculate the atomic masses of elements that have isotopes.
Students, form groups and discuss the following 
questions. Present your discussion points to the class.
1. In the drawbacks of Thomson’s Atomic Theory, we 
have seen that atoms of the same element are not 
always alike. What was the reason for this?
2. In the previous sections we have thoroughly discussed 
about the mass of an atom being concentrated in the 
nucleus. So how is it possible to get the atomic mass 
of an element?93Chemistr yGrade9 Structur eoftheAtom
3. Considering question number one above do you 
think the atomic mass of an element will always be 
the same? Why?
4. What is the difference between mass number and 
atomic mass of an element?
Activity 3.14
All atoms of the same element have the same number of protons, but some may have
different numbers of neutrons. For example, all carbon atoms have six protons, and 
most have six neutrons as well. But some carbon atoms have seven or eight neutrons 
instead of the usual six. Atoms of the same element that differ in their numbers of 
neutrons are called isotopes . Many isotopes occur naturally. Usually, one or two 
isotopes of an element are the most stable and common. Different isotopes of an 
element generally have the same physical and chemical properties because they have 
the same numbers of protons and electrons.
Example  3.9: Hydrogen Isotopes
Hydrogen is an example of an element that has isotopes. Three isotopes of hydrogen 
are modelled in Figure 3.25 . Most hydrogen atoms have just one proton, one electron, 
and lack a neutron. These atoms are just called hydrogen . Some hydrogen atoms have 
one neutron as well. These atoms are the isotope named deuterium. Other hydrogen 
atoms have two neutrons. These atoms are the isotope named tritium. They are also 
known as heavy hydrogen.
Figure 3.25  The three most stable isotopes of hydrogen: protium (A = 1), deuterium (A 
= 2), and tritium (A = 3).
For most elements other than hydrogen, isotopes are named for their mass number. For 
example, carbon atoms with the usual 6 neutrons have a mass number of 12 (6 protons 
+ 6 neutrons = 12), so they are called carbon-12. Carbon atoms with 7 neutrons have 
an atomic mass of 13 (6 protons + 7 neutrons = 13). These atoms are the isotope 
called carbon-13.94Chemistr yGrade9 Structur eoftheAtom
Stability of Isotopes
Atoms need a certain proportion of neutrons to protons to have a stable nucleus. Having 
too many or too few neutrons relative to protons, results in an unstable, or radioactive, 
nucleus that will sooner or later breakdown to a more stable form. This process is 
called radioactive decay. Many isotopes have radioactive nuclei, and these isotopes 
are referred to as radioisotopes . When they decay, they release particles that may 
be destructive. This is why radioactive isotopes are risky and why working with them 
requires special suits for protection. The isotope of carbon known as carbon-14 is an 
example of a radioisotope. In contrast, the carbon isotopes called carbon-12 and 
carbon-13  are stable.
This whole discussion of isotopes brings us back to Dalton’s Atomic Theory . According 
to Dalton, atoms of a given element are identical. But if atoms of a given element can 
have different numbers of neutrons, then they can have different masses as well. How 
did Dalton miss this? It turns out that elements found in nature exist as constant uniform 
mixtures of their naturally occurring isotopes. In other words, a piece of lithium metal 
always contains both types of naturally occurring lithium (the type with 3 neutrons and 
the type with 4 neutrons). Moreover, it always contains the two in the same relative 
abundance. In a lump of lithium, 93% will always be lithium with 4 neutrons, while the 
remaining 7% will always be lithium with 3 neutrons.
Calcul ating mass n umber of isotopes
Problem 1 : Lithium Isotopes
a. What are the atomic number and the mass number of an isotope of lithium 
containing 3 neutrons?
b. What are the atomic number and the mass number of an isotope of lithium 
containing 4 neutrons?
Solution
A lithium atom contains 3 protons in its nucleus irrespective of the number of neutrons 
or electrons.
a. Atomic number = (number of protons) = 3
  (number of neutrons) = 3
  Mass number = (number of protons) + (number of neutrons)
  mass number = 3 + 3 = 6
a. Atomic number = (number of protons) = 3
  (number of neutrons) = 4
  Mass number = (number of protons) + (number of neutrons)
  mass number = 3 + 4 = 7
Note that because the lithium atom always has 3 protons, the atomic number for 
lithium is always 3. The mass number, however, is 6 in the isotope with 3 neutrons, and 
7 in the isotope with 4 neutrons.  Naturally, only certain isotopes exist. For instance, 
lithium exists as an isotope with 3 neutrons, and as an isotope with 4 neutrons, but it 95Chemistr yGrade9 Structur eoftheAtom
doesn’t exist as an isotope with 2 neutrons, or as an isotope with 5 neutrons.
Atomic Mass
Masses of separate atoms are very, very small. Using a modern device called a 
mass spectrometer ;	it	is	possible	to	measure	such	tiny	masses.	An	atom	of	oxygen-16,	
for example, has a mass of 2.66×10-23 g. While comparisons of masses measured 
in grams would have some utility, it is far more practical to have a system that will 
permit us to more easily compare relative atomic masses. Scientists decided on using 
the carbon-12 nuclide as the reference standard by which all other masses would be 
compared.	By	defi	nition,	one	atom	of	carbon-12	is	assigned	a	mass	of	12	 atomic mass 
units	(amu).	An	atomic	mass	unit	is	defi	ned	as	a	mass	equal	to	one-twelfth	the	mass	of	
an atom of carbon-12 or 1.992646547 × 10−23 g, which is assigned an atomic mass 
of 12 units. In this scale, 1 atomic mass unit (amu) corresponds to 1.660539040×10−24
g. The atomic mass unit is also called the Dalton (Da), after English chemist John Dalton. 
The mass of any isotope of any element is expressed in relation to the carbon-12 
standard. For example, one atom of helium-4 has a mass of 4.0026 amu. An atom of 
sulfur-32 has a mass of 31.972 amu.
Average Atomic Mass
Since many elements have some isotopes, chemists use average atomic mass. If we 
know	the	natural	abundance	and	the	mass	of	all	the	isotopes,	we	can	fi	nd	the	average	
atomic mass. The natural abundance of an isotope of an element is the percent of 
that isotope as it occurs in a sample on earth. The average atomic mass is merely 
a weighted average of the masses of all the isotopes. We can calculate this by the 
following equation:
Average Atomic Mass = [(% isotope 1)(mass of isotope 1)] ÷ 100 + [(% isotope 2)
(mass of isotope 2)] ÷ 100 + ...
Problem 2:  Find the average mass of lithium (Li-7, 93% and Li-6, 7%).
Solution : We follow the following calculation:
Lithium with 4 neutrons has a mass number of 7 and its percentage abundance is 93%.
Lithium with 3 neutrons has a mass number of 6 and its percentage abundance is 7%.
Average mass of lithium = (7 x 93) ÷100  +  (6 x 7) ÷100
    6.51  +  0.42 = 6.93
The average atomic mass of lithium is, therefore, 6.93 amu.
Problem 3: Boron has two naturally occurring isotopes. In a sample of boron, 20% 
of the atoms are B-10, which is an isotope of boron with 5 neutrons and a mass of 
10 amu. The other 80% of the atoms are B-11, which is an isotope of boron with 6 
neutrons and a mass of 11 amu. What is the atomic mass of boron?96Chemistr yGrade9 Structur eoftheAtom
Following the same  approach as lithium, the average atomic mass of boron is:
Atomic mass of boron = [(10 x 20) ÷100] + [(11 x 80) ÷100] 
            = 2 + 8.8 
            = 10.8
The average atomic mass is, therefore,10.8 amu.
Problem 4: Neon has three naturally occurring isotopes. In a sample of neon, 90.92% 
of the atoms are Ne-20, which is an isotope of neon with 10 neutrons and a mass of 
19.99 amu. Another 0.3% of the atoms are Ne-21, which is an isotope of neon with 
11 neutrons and a mass of 20.99 amu. The remaining 8.85% of the atoms are Ne-22, 
which is an isotope of neon with 12 neutrons and a mass of 21.99 amu. What is the 
atomic mass of neon?
Solution
Neon has three isotopes. We will use the equation:
Atomic mass = [(% isotope1) (mass of isotope1)] ÷100  + [(% isotope 2) (mass of 
isotope 2)] ÷100 + [(% isotope 3) (mass of isotope 3)] ÷100
% Isotope 1 = 0.9092 (write all percent ages as decimals), mass of isotope 1 
                   = 19.99 
% Isotope 2 = 0.003, mass of isotope 2 = 20.99 
% Isotope 3 = 0.0885, mass of isotope 3 = 21.99 
Substituting these into the equation, and we get:
Atomic mass of neon = 
= [(0.9092) (19.99)] ÷100 + [(0.003) (20.99)] ÷100 + [(0.0885) (21.99)] ÷100
= 20.17 amu
The average atomic mass of neon atom is, therefore, 20.17 amu.
Dalton always experimented with large element-chunks that contained all of the 
naturally occurring isotopes of that element. As a result, when he performed his 
measurements, he was in fact perceiving the averaged properties of all the different 
isotopes in the sample. We will do the same thing for most of our purposes in chemistry, 
and deal with the average mass of the atoms. Fortunately, other than having different 
masses, most other properties of different isotopes are similar.97Chemistr yGrade9 Structur eoftheAtom
Provide the correct answer for the following questions.
1. In an element that has isotopes, which of the sub -atomic particles are 
different, and which remain unchanged?
2. How many protons, electrons, and neutrons are there in each of the 
following atom?
   Co60
27Ca45
20a. b.Na-24c. d.Sr-90
3. Calculate the average atomic mass of copper: Cu-63, 69.15% & Cu- 5, 
30.85%.
4. Calculate the average atomic mass of chlorine: Cl-35, 75% & Cl-37, 
25%.Exercise 3.17
3.5.4 Main Energy Levels
At the end of this section, you will be able to describe main energy level.
Students, form groups and discuss the following 
questions. Present your discussion points to the class.
1. Who discovered energy levels? What is the other 
name of energy levels?
2. In the Bohr’s atomic model, why do electrons 
disperse themselves?
3. According to Bohr’s atomic model, how do electrons 
arrange themselves?Activity 3.15
The concept of orbits in which electrons revolve around the nucleus was proposed by 
a	student	of	Rutherford	named	Niels	Bohr	in1913.	Refer	the	fi	ve	principles	of	Bohr’s	
atomic model discussed under section 3.4.3.  Today, in chemistry, the principal energy 
level or the main energy level of an electron refers to the shell in which the electron is 
located relative to the atom’s nucleus. This level is denoted by the principal quantum 
number n. The principal number could also be denoted by the whole numbers 1, 2, 3, 
4, . . . or by the letters K, L, M, N, etc. (Figure 3.26 )98Chemistr yGrade9 Structur eoftheAtom
Figure 3.26  Main energy levels.
The energy of the orbit sometimes known as the shell increases upon moving away 
from the nucleus i.e., it follows the increasing order K < L < M < N or 1 < 2 < 3 < 4, 
etc.
Provide the correct answer for the following questions.
1. What is the main energy level of an electron?
2. How	many	main	energy	levels	does	each	of	the	fi	rst	twenty	elements	(H	
to Ca) have?Exercise 3.18
3.5.5 Electro nic Conﬁ  guration on Main Shells
At the end of this section, you will be able to 
defi	ne	electronic	confi	guration;		
write	the	ground	state	electronic	confi	guration	of	the	elements;
draw	diagrams	to	show	the	electronic	confi	guration	of	the	fi	rst	20	elements;
write	electronic	confi	guration	of	the	elements	using	noble	gas	as	a	core.
Students, form groups and discuss the following 
questions. Present your discussion points to the class. 
1. In	a	certain	class	room,	there	are	2	seats	in	the	fi	rst	
row, 8 seats in the second row, 18 seats in the third 
row, and 32 seats at the back of the room. 99Chemistr yGrade9 Structur eoftheAtom
If the rows with small seats are closer to the teacher 
i.e., 2, 18, 32 respectively and all students must sit 
beginning from the seats closer to the teacher, how 
will 35 students take seat?
2. How would you arrange 20 electrons on an atom 
that can hold 2 electrons on K-shell, 8 electrons on 
L-shell, 18 electrons on M-shell, and 32 electrons on 
N-shell? (Hint begin arranging electrons from the 
lowest shell, in energy.  Activity 3.16
We picture an atom as a small nucleus surrounded by a much larger volume of space 
containing the electrons. This space is divided into regions called principal energy 
levels. Each principal energy level can contain up to 2n2 electrons, where n is the 
number	of	the	level	(n	=	1,	2,	3,	etc.).	Thus,	the	fi	rst	level	can	contain	up	to	2	electrons,	
2(12)	=	2;	the	second	up	to	8	electrons,	2(22)	=	8;	the	third	up	to	18,	2(32) = 18, and 
so on. Only seven energy levels are needed to contain all the electrons in an atom of 
any of those elements known thus far. The systematic arrangement of electrons in the 
various shell or orbits in an atom is called electronic	confi	guration.
The	electron	confi	guration of an element describes how electrons are distributed in 
their	energy	levels	or	shells.	Electron	confi	gurations	of	atoms	in	the	main	energy	levels	
follow a standard notation in which the number of electrons arranged in all electron-
containing atomic shells is placed in a sequence. Filling energy levels with electrons 
begins from the lower in energy or the shell closer to the nucleus i.e., K shell and goes 
on sequentially to L, M, N, etc. 
The last shell or the outermost shell from the nucleus with electrons is called the 
valence shell. The shell inner to this is called the penultimate shell,  and the one inner to 
penultimate shell is called the anti-penultimate shell.
Shell 2n2
K 2
L 8
M 18
N 32
O 50
The	maximum	number	of	electrons	that	can	be	fi	lled	in	the	valence	shell	is	8,	that	in	the
penultimate shell is 18, and the anti-penultimate shell has a maximum capacity of 32 
electrons.	The	fi	lling	of	electrons	till	atomic	number	30	follows	the	following	pattern.100Chemistr yGrade9 Structur eoftheAtom
K L M N
2
2 8
2 8 8
2 8 8 2
2 8 18 2
Example 3.10 : The atomic	number	of	calcium	is	20.	Write	the	electronic	confi	guration	
of calcium. 
Solution : 
The	fi	rst	shell	(K	shell)	can	hold	2(12) = 2, 
The second shell (L shell) can hold 2(22) = 8,
The third shell (M shell) can hold 2(32)	=	18	but	since	calcium	has	only	20	electrons;	the	
fi	rst	two	shells	held	10	(2	+	8)	electrons.	Hence	the	number	of	electrons	left	from	these	
shells will be 20 -10 = 10. Therefore, the M shell is left with 10 electrons. However, 
according to the above rule the valence shell cannot hold more than 8 electrons. We 
can	then	write	the	electronic	confi	guration	of	Ca	=	2,	8,	8,	2.	
Example 3.11 :	Write	the	electronic	confi	guration	of	Argon	(electrons	18).	
Solution:	Following	the	same	procedure	as	calcium,	the	electronic	confi	guration	of	
argon will be: Ar = 2, 8, 8.
The electronic	confi	guration	of the elements could also be drawn using atomic diagrams. 
For	example,	the	diagrammatic	representation	of	the	electronic	confi	gurations	of	some	
elements is shown in Figure 3.27 , below.
Figure 3.27	Electronic	confi	guration	of	H,	He,	Li,	C,	F,	Ne,	Na,	Si,	Cl,	and	Ar	using	
energy diagrams.101Chemistr yGrade9 Structur eoftheAtom
1. Defi	ne	the	term	electronic	confi	guration	of	an	element.
2. Write	the	electronic	confi	gurations	of	the	fi	rst	20	elements	(H	to	Ca)	in	the	
periodic table.
3. Draw	the	electronic	confi	guration	of	the	fi	rst	20	elements	(H	to	Ca)	using	the	
energy diagrams.Exercise 3.19
3.5.6 Valence E lectrons
At the end of this section, you will be able to describe valence electrons.
Students, form groups and discuss the following 
questions. Present your discussion points to the class. 
Given an atom X has atomic number 20, its electronic 
confi	guration	is	K=2,L	=	8,M	=	8	and	N	=	2.	Which	
shell electrons are
1. Valence electron 
2. Penultimate electrons  and
3. Antipenultimate electrons?Activity 3.17
As stated earlier, the energy related with an energy level increases as the distance 
from the nucleus increases. An electron in the seventh energy level has more energy 
associated	with	it	than	does	one	in	the	fi	rst	energy	level.	The	lesser	the	number	of	the	
principal energy level, the closer the electron in it is to the nucleus, and the more tough 
it is to remove this electron from the atom, due to strong electrostatic attraction.
In section 3.5.5, we have discussed about	writing	the	electronic	confi	guration	of	
elements. The electrons that occupy the outermost shell of an atom are called valence 
electrons. Valence electrons are furthest from the nucleus of the atom. They are the 
most easily lost, and the ones that determine the element’s chemical properties, and 
how an atom will react. Atoms lose, gain, or share their valence electrons during 
chemical	reactions.	By	writing	an	electronic	confi	guration,	you	will	be	able	to	see	how	
many electrons occupy the highest energy level.
Example 3.12 : The electronic	confi	guration	 of	silicon	(Si)	is	2,	8,	4.	The	fi	rst	two	
electrons occupy the inner shell (K shell), the next 8 electrons occupy the middle shell 
(L shell), and the remaining 4 electrons occupy the outermost shell (M shell) known as 
the valence shell (see Figure 3.28 ).102Chemistr yGrade9 Structur eoftheAtom
Figure 3.28  An energy diagram showing the valence electrons of Silicon. 
Example 3.13 :	The	electronic	confi	guration	of	argon	(Ar)	is	2,	8,	8.	The	valence	shell	
of the argon atom is the M shell having 8 valence electrons (see Figure 3.29 ).
Figure 3.29  An energy diagram showing the valence electrons of Argon atom. 
Provide the correct answer for the following questions.
1. Defi	ne	the	term	electronic	confi	guration	of	an	element.
2. Write	the	elesctronic	confi	gurations	of	the	fi	rst	20	elements	(H	to	Ca)	in	the	
periodic table.
3. Draw	the	electronic	confi	guration	of	the	fi	rst	20	elements	(H	to	Ca)	using	the	
energy diagrams.Exercise 3.20
103Chemistr yGrade9 Structur eoftheAtom
Key Terms and Equations
Atom   
Theory  
Atomic Theory  
Chemical Law  
Scientifi	c	Law
Electron  Proton  
Neutron   
Nucleus   
Cathode ray
Anode ray  
γ-ray  
Discharge tube  
Cathode-ray 
tube 
Anode
Cathode  
Fluorescent 
Magnetic Field 
Electric	fi	eld		α particle
X-ray  
Canal rays  
Perforated 
cathode  
Nuclear model  
Atomic model
α-Radiation  
α-Decay 
Isotope  
Atomic mass unit 
Atomic mass
Mass number  
Atomic number  
Protium  
Deuterium  
Tritium
Radioactive  
Radioactive decay 
Radioisotopes  
Average atomic 
mass
Natural 
abundance  
Energy level  
Shell   
Orbit   
Principal quantum 
number
Electronic 
confi	guration		
Valence shell  
Valence electron  
Penultimate shell
Anti-penultimate 
shell  
Atomic diagram 
Mass Number = (number of protons) + (number of neutrons)
Average Atomic Mass = [(% isotope 1)(mass of isotope 1)] ÷100  + [(%isotope 2)
(mass of isotope 2)] ÷100 + . . . 
Unit Summary
In this unit we have discussed about how the atomic structure was proposed in 
conjunction with the discoveries of the atom and the fundamental subatomic particles 
known	as	protons,	neutrons,	electron	and	the	nucleus.	This	then	led	us	to	the	defi	nitions	
of terms like atomic number, mass number, isotope, energy level, valence electrons, 
and	electronic	confi	guration	of	atoms.	We	have	also	discussed	how	to	calculate	the	
number of protons, electrons, and neutrons of atoms from atomic and mass numbers 
of atoms. We have discussed about the calculation of the atomic masses of elements 
that	have	isotopes.	Finally	we	have	brieﬂ	y	seen	how	to	arrange	electrons	on	the	main	
energy	levels	of	the	atoms	which	is	commonly	known	as	the	electronic	confi	guration	
of atoms.
Atomic theory originated as a philosophical concept in ancient India and Greece. The 
word “atom” comes from the ancient Greek word atomos, which means indivisible. 
According to atomism, matter consists of discrete particles. However, the theory was 
one of many explanations for matter and wasn’t based on experiential data. 
In the middle of the 5th century BC, an ancient Greek philosopher, Empedocles , thought 104Chemistr yGrade9 Structur eoftheAtom
that all materials are made up of four things called elements: earth, air, water, and 
fi	re. Plato, student of Socrates and teacher of Aristotle, adopted Empedocles’ Theory, 
and coined the term element to describe these four substances. His successor, Aristotle , 
also adopted the concept of four elements. The Greek philosophers’ concept of four 
elements existed for more than two thousand years. There after Zeno of Elea came 
up with his paradoxical divisibility and indivisibility of mater. Zeno’s indivisibility 
and	divisibility	of	matter	were	later	on	changed	by	the	concept	of	an	‘atom’ by 
Leucippus and Democritus . In the 5th century BC, Democritus proposed that matter 
consists of indestructible, indivisible units called atoms . However, since Aristotle and 
other prominent thinkers of the time strongly opposed their idea of the atom, their 
theory was disregarded and essentially buried until the 16th and 17th centuries.
It took until the end of the 18th century for science to provide concrete evidence of the 
existence of atoms. In 1789, Antoine Lavoisier formulated the Law of Conservation of 
Mass, which states that the mass of the products of a reaction is the same as the mass 
of the reactants.	Ten	years	later,	Joseph	Louis	Proust	proposed	the	Law	of	Defi	nite	
Proportions, which states that the masses of elements in a compound always occur in 
the same proportion.
These theories didn’t reference atoms, yet John Dalton built upon them to develop the 
Law of Multiple Proportions, which states that the ratios of masses of elements in a 
compound are small whole numbers. Dalton’s Law of Multiple Proportions drew from 
experimental data. He proposed that each chemical element consists of a single type 
of atom that could not be destroyed by any chemical means. His work marked the 
beginning	of	the	scientifi	c	atomic	theory.
Up to this point, atoms were believed to be the smallest units of matter. In 1897, J.J. 
Thomson discovered the electron. Thomson also discovered the charge to mass ratio 
of the electron. He believed atoms could be divided. Because the electron carried a 
negative charge, he proposed a plum pudding model of the atom (1904), in which 
electrons were embedded in a mass of positive charge to yield an electrically neutral 
atom. Subsequently in 1909, the American scientist Robert Millikan found the charge 
and mass of the electron, in his oil drop experiment.
Ernest Rutherford, one of Thomson’s students, disproved the plum pudding model in 
1909. Rutherford found that the positive charge of an atom and most of its mass were 
at the center, or nucleus, of an atom. In 1911, Rutherford together with his students 
Geiger and Marsden described a planetary model in which electrons orbited a small, 
positive-charged nucleus.
Rutherford was on the right track, but his model couldn’t explain why the electrons 
didn’t crash into the nucleus. In 1913, Niels Bohr proposed the Bohr model, which states 
that electrons only orbit the nucleus at speciﬁ  c distances from the nucleus. According to 
his model, electrons couldn’t spiral into the nucleus but could make quantum leaps 
between energy levels. Subsequently, in 1920, Rutherford discovered the existence 105Chemistr yGrade9 Structur eoftheAtom
of the proton in the nucleus. In 1932, James Chadwick discovered the neutron which 
is another sub-atomic particle. His atomic model encompasses a small positively 
charged nucleus (where protons and neutrons reside) at the centre of the atom and 
the electrons revolving around the nucleus in orbits, which is the basic atomic model.
The	discoveries	of	the	above	facts	about	atoms	led	to	the	modifi	ed	Modern	Atomic	
Theory postulates. Modern Atomic Theory postulates:
 Atom is made up of the sub-atomic p articles: protons, neutrons and electrons.
 Atoms of the same element may not be the same in all aspects, for example 
isotopes.
 Atoms of different elements may not be different in all aspects, for example 
isobars.
 The ratio in which atoms combined may not be simple.
The presence of positively charged particles in an atom has been predicted by 
Goldstein (1886) based on the electrical neutrality of an atom. The discovery of the 
proton by Goldstein was done based on the cathode ray experiment conducted by 
using a perforated cathode.
The electron was one of the fundam ental subatomic  particle that was discovered by 
the British physicist, J.J. Thomson, in 1897.  In the discovery of electrons J. J. Thomson 
performed several experiments on the cathode rays. 
The	fi	rst	experiment	he	has	studied	was	the	straight	line	travel	of	cathode	rays	
in the discharge tube by placing a small object between the cathode and the 
anode. 
 J. J. Thomson’s second experiment was performed by placing a light paddle 
wheel between cathode and anode to study the particulate nature of the 
cathode rays. 
 J. J. Thomson performed the third and fourth experiments to investigate the 
negative charge of the cathode ray by passing cathode rays through electric 
and	magnetic	fi	elds.	Thomson	concluded	that	the	particles	had	a	net	negative	
charge;	these	particles	are	now	called electrons .
In 1920, in his discovery of the nucleus, Rutherford targeted a stream of positively 
charged α-particles at a very thin gold foil target and inspected how the α-particles 
were scattered by the foil. He inspected that a small fraction of the α-particles were 
deﬂ	ected	at	large	angles,	and	some	were	reﬂ	ected	directly	back	at	the	source.	
Rutherford’s results were not consistent with the Dalton’s atomic model in which the 
mass and positive charges are distributed regularly throughout the volume of an 
atom. Instead, they strongly suggested that both the mass and positive charge are 
concentrated in a minute fraction of the volume of an atom, which Rutherford called 
the nucleus. Rutherford, however, was cornered by the other scientists by the question: 
“Why does the nucleus not disintegrate in spite of repulsion among the protons?” 
To explain the stability of the nucleus, Rutherford predicted the presence of neutral 
particles.106Chemistr yGrade9 Structur eoftheAtom
The English physicist, James Chadwick bombarded Beryllium nuclei with α-particles 
and	observed	some	radiations	that	possess	material	particles	and	did	deﬂ	ect	in	an	
electric	fi	eld.	This	confi	rmed	the	fact	that	these	rays	contained	neutral	particles.	He	
called these neutral particles neutrons . 
Electrons are one of three fundamental particles that make up the atoms. Electrons are 
extremely small (5.4858 x 10-4 amu) and contribute almost nothing to the total mass 
of an atom. The electric charge of an electron is -1.
The proton is one of the three sub-atomic particles found in the nucleus of an atom. 
Protons have a positive electrical charge of one (+1) and a mass of 1.0073 atomic 
mass unit (amu).
Neutrons are subatomic particles f ound inside the nucleus of an atom. They have no 
charge. The mass of a neutron is a little greater (1.0087 amu) than the mass of a 
proton. Together with protons, they make up virtually all of the mass of an atom.
Scientists are always interested in atomic number and how it differs between different 
elements since an atom of one element can be distinguished from an atom of another 
element by the number of protons in its nucleus. The number of protons in an atom is 
called its atomic number  (Z).
The mass number (A) of an atom is the total number of protons and neutrons in its 
nucleus. It is also known as the total number of nucleons in the atom’s nucleus. It is 
calculated by using the formula:
Mass number A = (number of protons) + (number of neutrons)
To write a nuclear symbol, the mass number is placed at the upper left (superscript) 
of the chemical symbol, and the atomic number is placed at the lower left (subscript) 
of the symbol.
All atoms of the same element have the same number of protons, but some may 
have different numbers of neutrons. Atoms of the same element that differ in their 
numbers of neutrons are called isotopes. Different isotopes of an element generally 
have the same physical and chemical properties because they have the same numbers 
of protons and electrons.
Mass of a single atom is very, very small. Using a modern device called a mass 
spectrometer ;	it	is	possible	to	measure	such	tiny	masses.	By	defi	nition,	one	atom	of	
carbon-12 is assigned a mass of 12 atomic mass units (amu). An atomic mass unit 
is	defi	ned	as	a	mass	equal	to	one-twelfth	the	mass	of	an	atom	of	carbon-12	or	
1.992646547 × 10−23 g, which is assigned an atomic mass of 12 units. In this scale, 
1 atomic mass unit (amu) corresponds to 1.660539040 × 10−24 g. The mass of any 
isotope of any element is expressed in relation to the carbon-12 standard.
Since many elements have some isotopes, chemists use average atomic mass. The 
average atomic mass is merely a weighted average of the masses of all the isotopes. 107Chemistr yGrade9 Structur eoftheAtom
We can calculate this by the following equation:
Average Atomic Mass = (%isotope 1)(mass of isotope1) + (%isotope2)(mass of 
isotope 2) + ....
Today, in chemistry, the principal energy level or the main energy level of an electron 
refers to the shell in which the electron is located relative to the atom’s nucleus. This 
level is denoted by the principal quantum number n ( 1, 2, 3, etc or K, L, M, N, etc).
The	electron	confi	guration of an element describes how electrons are distributed in 
their energy levels or shells. Filling energy levels with electrons begins from the lower 
in energy or the shell closer to the nucleus i.e., K shell and goes on sequentially to L, 
M,	N,	etc.	The	maximum	number	of	electrons	that	can	be	fi	lled	in	the	valence	shell	is	
8, that in the penultimate shell is 18, and the anti-penultimate shell has a maximum 
capacity of 32 electrons.
The electrons that occupy the outermost shell of an atom are called valence electrons. 
Valence electrons are furthest from the nucleus of the atom. They are the most easily 
lost, and the ones that determine the element’s chemical properties, and how an atom 
will react.
Review Exercise
Part I: Basic level questions 
Provide short answer for the following questions.
1. Which postulate of Dalton’s Atomic Theory is considered to be correct even 
today?
2. “Like atoms are identical in all respects”. This statement of Dalton’s Atomic 
Theory was contradicted. What discovery did contradict this?
3. What was the basis for the proposal of Dalton’s Atomic Theory?
4. List the three statements that make up the Modern Atomic Theory.
5. Explain how atoms are composed.
6. Why was gas at low pressure taken by Thomson while experimenting?
7. Tell the mass and the charge of the fundamental particles of an atom.
8. Which is larger, a proton or an electron?
9. Which is larger, a neutron or an electron?
10. What is an atomic model?
11. Who discovered the protons? Based on what experiment was he able to discover 
these protons?
12. Where are most of the mass of an atom located?
13. With the increase in the radius of the orbit, the energy of an electron 
____________.
14. What is an α particle?
15. Describe J. J. Thomson’s Atomic Model.108Chemistr yGrade9 Structur eoftheAtom
16. What are the  observations  and conclusions drawn by J.J. Thomson while 
conducting experiments with dischage tube for studying the properties of 
cathode rays?
17. Sketch	a	diagram	of	a	boron	atom,	which	has	fi	ve	protons	and	six	neutrons	in	
its nucleus.
18. Sketch a diagram of a helium atom, which has two protons and two neutrons in 
its nucleus.
19. Defi	ne	an	atomic	number.	What	is	the	atomic	number	for	a	boron	atom?
20. What is the atomic number of helium?
21. Defi	ne	an	isotope	and	give	example(s).
22. What is the difference between deuterium and tritium?
23. Which pair represents isotopes?
a. 2He4 and 2He3
b. 26Fe56 and 25Mn56
c. 14Si28 and 15P31
d. 20CA40 and 19K40
e. 26Fe56 and 26Fe58
f. 92U238 and 92U235
24. Write complete symbols of each atom, including their atomic number and the 
mass number.
a. An oxygen atom with 8 protons and 8 neutrons
b. A potassium atom with 19 protons and 20 neutrons
c. A lithium atom with 3 protons and 4 neutrons
d. A magnesium atom with 12 protons and 12 neutrons
e. A magnesium atom with 12 protons and 13 neutrons
f. A xenon atom with 54 protons and 77 neutrons
25. Americium-241 (Am-241) is an isotope used in smoke detectors. What is the 
complete symbol for this isotope?
26. Carbon-14 is an isotope used to perform radioactive dating tests on previously 
living material. What is the complete symbol for this isotope?
Part II: Intermediary level questions 
Tell whether the following statements are True or False.
27. According to Thomson’s Atomic Model, electrons revolve around the nucleus.
28. In a discharge tube, anode rays originate when electrons collide with gas 
molecules.
29. 8O16 and 8O18 are isotopes while 20Ca40 and 18Ar40 are isobars.
30. α-ray scattering experiment proved that the positive particles are present in 
the extra nuclear part of an atom.109Chemistr yGrade9 Structur eoftheAtom
Fill in the Blanks.
31. Anode	rays	are	deﬂ	ected	towards	the	negative	plate	in	the	presence	of	an	
electric	fi	eld	because	they	consist	of	___________	particles.
32. Some of the α-rays’	deﬂ	ection	in	acute	and	obtuse	angles	are	due	to	the	
presence of the _________ in the center of the atom.
33. The	energy	of	an	electron	present	in	the	fi	rst	orbit	of	an	atom	is	________	than	
the energy of an electron in the other orbits.
Choose the correct answer from the given alternatives 
34. Which of the following concepts was not considered in Rutherford’s Atomic 
Model?
a. The electrical neutrality of an atom. 
b. The quantization of energy.
c. The electrons revolve around the nucleus at very high speeds.
d. The  existence of nuclear forces of attraction on the electrons.
35. When alpha particles are sent through a thin metal foil ,only one out of ten 
thousand of them are rebounded. This observation led to the conclusion that
a. Positively charged particles are concentrated at the centre of the atom.
b. More number of electrons are revolving around the nucleus of the atom.
c. Unit positive charge is only present in an atom.
d. The massive sphere with a more negative charge and unit positive charge 
is present at the center of the atom.
36. Canal ray experiment lead to the discovery of ________.
a. protons  
b. neutrons  c. electrons  
d. nucleus
37. In which of the following pairs of shells that energy difference between two 
adjacent orbits is minimum?
a. K, L  
b. L, M  c. M, N  
d. N, O
38. Assertion A: An electron in the inner orbit is more tightly bound to the nucleus. 
Reason B: The greater the absolute value of the energy of an electron ,the more 
tightly the electron is bound to the nucleus.
a. Both A and B are true but B is not the appropriate reason for A.
b. Both A and B are individually correct and B is the correct reason for A.
c. A is correct but B is not correct.
d. Both A and B are not correct.
39. If two naturally  occurring isotopes of an element are 7X15 and 7X11, what is 
the percentage composition of each isotope of X occurring respectively if the 
average atomic weight accounts  for 14?
a. 95, 5 
b. 80, 20 c. 75, 25  
d. 65, 35110Chemistr yGrade9
40. An element has two isotopes with mass numbers 16 and 18. The average atomic 
weight is 16.5. The percentage abundance of these isotopes is ________and 
______ respectively.
a. 75, 25  
b. 25, 75  c. 50, 50  
d. 33.33, 66.67
41. Which among the following are isobars?
a. bXa, bYa+1  
b. bXa, cYb  c.   bXa, b+1Ya 
d.   bXa, b-1Ya-1
42. Some of the elements have fractional atomic masses. The reason for this could 
be
a. the existence of isobars.  
b. the existence of isotopes.
c. the nuclear reactions. d. the presence of neutrons in the 
nucleus.
43. Which of the following concepts, was not considered in Rutherford’s atomic 
model?
a. The electrical neutrality of atom. 
b. The quantization of energy.
c. Electrons revolve around the nucleus at very high speed.   
d. Existence of nuclear forces of attraction on the electrons. 
44. 7X15, 7X11 are two naturally occurring isotopes of an element X. What is the 
percentage of each isotope of X if the average atomic mass is 14?
a. 95, 5  
b. 80, 20 c. 75, 25  
d. 65, 35
45. Rutherford’s α-particle scattering experiment eventually led to the conclusion 
that 
a. Mass and energy are related.  
b. The point of impact with matter can be precisely determined.  
c. Neutrons are buried deep in the nucleus.  
d. Electrons are distributed in a large space around the nucleus.
46. The number of electrons present in the valence shell of an atom with atomic 
number 38 is
a. 2
b. 10
c. 1
d. 8Chemistr yGrade9
UNIT/gid00021/gid00021
Unit Outcomes 
After completing the unit, you will be able to
explain the historical development of the periodic classiﬁ  cation of the 
elements;
describe	the	periodic	classifi	cation	of	the	elements;
develop	the	skills	of	correlating	the	electron	confi	guration	of	elements	with	
the periodicity of the elements, predicting the trends of periodic properties 
of	elements	in	the	periodic	table;
acquire	skills	of	classifi	cations	based	on	patterns	in	chemistry;
demonstrate	 scientifi	c	 inquiry	 skills:	 observing,	 inferring,	 predicting,	
classifying, comparing and contrasting, making models, communicating, 
measuring, asking questions, interpreting illustrations, drawing conclusion, 
applying concepts and problem solving.PERIODIC CLASSIFICATION OF ELEMENTS 
112Chemistr yGrade9 Periodic Classiﬁca tionofElements
By forming groups discuss the following issues and present 
your conclusion to the class. 
How can you use a table of repeating events to predict 
the next events? Table 2.1 shows a familiar table of 
repeating properties. What is it? 
Of course, it is a calendar of month of Nehassie, 2013 
E.C and it is missing some information. You can determine 
what	is	missing	and	fi	ll	in	the	blanks.	Look	at	the	calendar	
again. The calendar has columns of days, Monday through 
Sunday. The calendar also has horizontal rows. They are 
its weeks. 
1. Examine the information surrounding each empty 
spot. Can you tell what information is needed in each 
empty spot? 
2. Fill in the missing information. 
For example: Conclude and Apply 
a. One day in column 4 is marked X, and a day in column 
5 is marked Y. What dates belong to these positions? 
Discuss your answers in your group. 
b. Column 3 does not have a name. What is the correct 
name of this column? 
c. What dates are included in the third row of the table? 
d. What day would the 25th of the previous month (month 
of Hamle, 2013 E.C) have been? What row of this 
table would it appear in? 
e. How do you relate this periodicity with the periodic 
classifi	cation	of	elements?	
Table 4.1 Periodicity in month.
Mon Tue Thu Fri Sat Su
1 2
3 4 5 6 7 8 9
10 11 12 X y 15 16
17 18 29 20 21 22 23
24 25 26 27 28 29 30Start-up Activity
113Chemistr yGrade9 Periodic Classiﬁca tionofElements
4.1 Historical Development of Periodic Classiﬁ  cation of the 
Elements 
Learning competencies
At the end of this section, you should be able to describe periodicity.
By forming groups discuss the following issues and 
present your conclusion to the class. 
a. The	relationship	to	the	fi	rst	octave	in	music	with	
eight notes is observed in musical instrument. That 
means	the	fi	rst	sound	repeats	itself	on	the	eighth	
(Do Ri Mi Fa So La Si Do). In group discuss how the 
Ethiopian cultural music does the same.
b. What can you say about the attempts by scientists 
and	what	was	the	basis	of	their	classifi	cation?
c. Can	you	explain	the	basis	of	early	classifi	cation	
of elements by scientists? Activity 4.1
In the nineteenth century, when chemists had only a vague idea of atoms and molecules 
and did not know of the existence of electrons and protons, they devised the periodic 
table using their knowledge of atomic masses. Accurate measurements of the atomic 
masses of many elements had already been made. Arranging elements according 
to their atomic masses in a periodic table seemed logical to chemists, who felt that 
chemical behaviour should somehow be related to atomic mass. 
4.1.1 Dobereiner’s Triads
In 1829, German c hemist Dobereiner was able to identify several groups of three 
elements that showed similarity in physical and chemical properties. He observed 
that in the set of three elements having similar properties (called triads), the atomic 
weight of the middle element is the arithmetic mean of the atomic weights of other two 
elements. Some examples of Dobereiner’s triads are as follows (Table 4.2):
Table 4.2 Examples of Dobereiner’s triads.
Element At. Weight Mean weight of ﬁ  rst and last element
(i) Li
           Na
           K7
23
397 39232+=
(ii) Ca
           Sr
           Ba40
88
13740 13788.52+=114Chemistr yGrade9 Periodic Classiﬁca tionofElements
(iii) Cl
           Br
           I35.5
80
12735.5 12781.252+=
(iv) S
          Se
          Te32
79
127.632 127.679.82+=
Only few such triads were available at that time and day by day as many more 
elements were discovered, the rule could no longer be generalized.
4.1.2 Newland’s Law of Octaves
An English chemist Alexender Newlands (Figure 4.1 )made the next attempt at 
classifi	cation	of	elements.	He	arranged	the	56	elements	known	then	in	increasing	
order of their atomic weight and observed that, “the properties of every eighth 
element	are	similar	to	that	of	the	fi	rst	one”.	He	compared	this	relationship	to	the	fi	rst	
octave in music with eight notes and called it Newlands’ law of octaves. How do you 
relate Activity 4.1 with the Newland’s Law of Octaves? The elements were arranged 
as follows (Table 4.3): 
Table 4.3  Newlands’ law of octaves.
Sa Re Ga Ma Pa Dha Ni Sa
Li Be B C N O F Na
Na Mg Al Si P S Cl K
K Ca
The	limitations	of	this	classifi	cation	of	elements	were	that:
i.  The inert gases were not discovered till then.
ii.  Beyond Ca, this repetition was not observed.
Figure 4.1 John Alexander Reina Newlands was an English chemist who worked on the 
development of the periodic table. He noticed that elemental properties repeated 
every seventh (or multiple of seven) elements, as musical notes repeat every eighth 
note.115Chemistr yGrade9 Periodic Classiﬁca tionofElements
Lother Meyer’s curve 
Lother Meyer plotted the atomic volume verses atomic mass, where the atomic volume 
is	defi	ned	as	follows:	
Atomic volume = Gram atomic mass of an element 
     Density (in g/ml)
The curve obtained is referre d to as Lother Meyer’s curve and is shown in Figure 4.2 .
         
Figure 4.2  Lother Meyer’s curve.
From this plot, Lother Meyer observed that:
1. The elements having similar properties are in the same position of the curve. For 
example,
a. Alkali metals ( Li, Na, K, Rb, Cs) are at the pe aks of the curve.
b. Alkaline earth metals (Be, Mg, Ca, Sr, Ba) are at the descending part of the 
curve.
c. Halogens (F, Cl, Br, I) are at the ascending part of the curve.
d. Most of the transition elements are lying in the broad minimas of the curve.
2. The atomic v olume of the elements changes periodically in a period, it initially 
decreases and then increases with broad minimas.
3. The atomic volume increases in a group, that is, in elements that exhibit similar 
properties.
4. Many other physical properties of the elements also change in a periodic manner 
like	melting	point,	boiling	point,	density,	thermal	expansion	coeffi	cient,	etc.
Based on these observ ations, he proposed that the physical properties of elements 
are periodic functions of their atomic weights and this formed the basis of Mendleev’s 
periodic table, which was also presented around the same time.116Chemistr yGrade9 Periodic Classiﬁca tionofElements
4.2 Mendleev’ s Classiﬁ  cation of the Elements
Learning competencies
At the end of this section, you should be able to state Mendeleev's Periodic law. 
Form group and by referring the Mendeleev’s periodic 
table	do	the	following	tasks	and	present	your	fi	ndings	
in	the	class.	Here	are	the	fi	rst	18	elements	with	their	
respective atomic masses. Arrange them in increasing 
order of atomic mass as Mendeleev did.
Element Atomic mass
A 1.008
B 4.003
C 6.941
D 9.012
E 10.811
F 12.011
G 14.007
H 15.999
I 18.998Element Atomic mass
J 20.180
K 22.990
L 24.305
M 26.982
N 28.086
O 30.974
P 32.065
Q 35.453
R 39.948
1. Draw sets of horizontal and vertical boxes similar 
to Mendeleev’s periodic table and label the group 
and period (see Table 4.4 ). In order of increasing 
atomic	weight,	fi	ll	into	each	set	the	letters	(A-R).	How	
many groups and periods did you get from your 
arrangement?
2. Label the letters (A-R) by their respective chemical 
symbols of similar atomic weight.
3. Do you see any regular patterns on the arrangement 
of elements? Activity 4.2
The earliest version of the current form of periodic table was presented simultaneously 
by Dmitri Mendeleev of Russia (Figure 4.3 )and Lothar Meyer of Germany. Both the
scientists arranged the elements in order of increasing atomic weights and observed 
that elements with similar properties (in families) appeared at regular intervals.117Chemistr yGrade9 Periodic Classiﬁca tionofElements
Figure 4.3 Dmitri Ivanovich Mendeleev (1834–1907) Mendeleev constructed a periodic 
table as part of his effort to systematize chemistry. He received many international 
honors for his work, but his reception in czarist Russia was mixed. He had pushed for 
political reforms and made many enemies as a result.
4.2.1 Mendeleev’s Periodic Law
Mendeleev’s periodic law stated that the physical and chemical properties of elements 
are the periodic function of their atomic weights.
In 1871, Mendeleev published a short periodic table which
1. consisted of only 63 elements. Inert gases were not included as they were not 
discovered at that time.
2. these elements were arranged in seven horizontal rows called as periods and 
eight vertical columns called as groups.
3. some	vacant	sites	were	specifi	ed	for	undiscovered	elements	and	their	properties	
predicted.	These	were	found	true	and	verifi	ed	when	these	elements	were	
discovered later.
In the periodic table, so constructed, the elements in the same families (e.g., lithium, 
sodium, potassium) were arranged in vertical columns designated as Groups I, II, III, IV, 
V, VI, VII, VIII. The horizontal rows were referred to as series ( Table 4.4).
Mendeleev’s periodic table	was	later	modifi	ed	after	the	discovery	of	inert	gases	and	
several other elements. The inert gases were placed in new Group 0. Each long period 
was divided into two series, named as odd and even depending on the serial number. 
The	fi	rst	seven	elements	formed	the	even	series	and	the	last	seven	elements	formed	
the odd series (not including the inert gases). The vertical Groups I to VII were further 
divided into two subgroups A and B to accommodate elements with difference in 
properties. The elements of even series in the long periods were placed in subgroup A 
while the elements of odd series were placed in the B subgroup. The Group 0 was not 
split further and in Group VIII three sets containing three elements each were placed.118Chemistr yGrade9 Periodic Classiﬁca tionofElements
Table 4.4 Modern version of Mendeleev’s short periodic table
Analyzing the modern version of the Mendeleev’s Periodic table (Table 4.4 ) give 
appropriate answers for the following questions. 
1. Why	does	the	fi	rst	period	contain	only	two	elements?	
2. To which group and period do the following elements belong? 
a. carbon
b. neon 
c. aluminumd. potassium 
e. calcium
f. sulphurExercise 4.1
4.2.2 Periodicity
Important characteristics of modern version of Mendeleev’s short periodic table are 
listed as follows:119Chemistr yGrade9 Periodic Classiﬁca tionofElements
I. Horizon tal Rows or Periods
1. First period consists of 2 elements and is known as very short period.
2. Second	period	consists	of	8	elements	and	is	known	as	fi	rst	short	period.
3. Third period consists of 8 elements and is known as second short period.
4. Fourth	period	consists	of	18	elements	and	is	known	as	fi	rst	long	period.
5. Fifth period consists of 18 elements and is known as second long period.
6. Sixth period consists of 32 elements.
7. Seventh period also consists of 32 elements and both period six and period 
seven are known as very loang periods.
II. Vertical Column s or Groups
1. Group IA elements are called as alkali metals (expect H).
2. Group IIA elements are called as alkaline earth metals.
3. Group VB elements are called as pnicogens.
4. Group VIB elements are called as chalcogens.
5. Group VIIB elements are called as halogens.
6. Group 0 elements are called as noble (inert) gases.
The merits of Mendeleev’s periodic table are listed as follows:
1. The study of properties of elements became more systematic and easier.
2. There are several vacant positions from which the guidance of discovery of new 
elements was found. 
The demerits of Mendeleev’s periodic table are given as follows:
Some of the elements are wrongly placed though their atomic weights are larger 
compared to the next one. For example,
(i) Ar:40  (ii) Te: 127.6 (iii) Co: 58.9
 K:39   I: 126.9   Ni: 58.6 
Moseley’s work
In 1913, Moseley performed an experiment in which he bombarded high speed 
electrons on different metal surfaces and obtained X-rays. He observed that there 
existed a systematic mathematical relationship between the wavelengths of the 
X-rays produced and the atomic numbers of the elements. This came to be known as 
Moseley’s law and is expressed as:
Zν∝
where ν is the frequency of X-rays and Z is the atomic number of elements. The plot 
of  .vs Zν is a straight line (Figure 4.4 )120Chemistr yGrade9 Periodic Classiﬁca tionofElements
Figure 4.4  Plots obtained in Moseley’s experiments.
Moseley’s experiment showed that the proper sequence criterion for the periodic 
arrangement of atoms was not atomic weight but atomic number. The cause of 
similarity	of	properties	was	the	repetition	of	the	outer	shell	electronic	confi	guration	
at regular intervals. This observation formed the basis of the modern periodic table.
4.3  The Mode rn Period ic Table
Learning competencies
At the end of this section, you should be able to
 state modern periodic law
 describe period 
 describe group 
 tell the number of groups and periods in the modern Periodic table
 tell the number of elements in each period
 predict the period and group of an element from its atomic number121Chemistr yGrade9 Periodic Classiﬁca tionofElements
Form group and by referring the modern periodic table 
do	the	following	tasks	and	present	your	fi	ndings	in	the	
class.
Element Atomic N umber
A 1
B 2
C 3
D 4
E 5
F 6
G 7
H 8
I 9Element Atomic N umber
J 10
K 11
L 12
M 13
N 14
O 15
P 16
Q 17
R 18
1. List down the elements from atomic number A up to R. 
Write	the	respective	electronic	confi	gurations.
2. Draw sets of vertical boxes. In order of increasing 
atomic	number,	fi	ll	into	each	set	the	symbol	of	all	
elements	having	the	same	outer	electron	confi	gurations.	
How many sets are there? Record your answer.
3. Draw sets of horizontal boxes. In order of increasing 
atomic	number,	fi	ll	into	each	set	the	symbols	of	all	
elements having the same number of shells. How many 
sets are there? How many elements are there in each 
set? Record your answers.
4. Do you see any regular patterns that you created in 
Steps 2 and 3?
5. Draw	one	complete	table	which	shows	all	elements;	
with the same number of outermost electrons in a 
vertical	column	fi	lling	the	same	outer	electron	shell	in	
a horizontal row. Activity 4.3
122Chemistr yGrade9 Periodic Classiﬁca tionofElements
Figure 4.5  The long form of modern periodic table and its segments.123Chemistr yGrade9 Periodic Classiﬁca tionofElements
4.3.1 The Periodic Law
According to the modern periodic law, the physical and chemical properties of the 
elements are the periodic functions of their atomic number. The long form of periodic 
table based upon the modern periodic law is depicted in Figure 4.5. Note that the 
arrangement	of	A	and	B	subgroups	is	different	from	that	in	the	modifi	ed	form	of	
Mendeleev’s periodic table. The left and right corners of the table are assigned as 
sub-groups A and the middle of the periodic table is assigned as subgroups B.
4.3.2 Groups and Periods
Many different forms of the periodic table have been published since Mendeleev’s 
time. Today, the long form of the periodic table, which is called the modern periodic 
table, is commonly in use. It is based on the modern periodic law. In the modern 
periodic table, elements are arranged in periods and groups. 
What are the basis for classifying the elements into groups and periods? What are 
the	similarities	and	differences	in	the	electron	confi	guration	of	S	nand	Cl?
Periods: The horizontal rows of elements in the periodic table are called periods or 
series. Elements in a period are arranged in increasing order of their atomic numbers 
from left to right. There are 7 periods in the modern periodic table, and each period 
is represented by an Arabic numeral: 1, 2 . . . and 7.
 Elements in the same period have the same number of shells.
 Periods 1, 2, and 3 are called short periods while periods 4, 5, and 6 are known 
as long periods.
 Period 1 contains only 2 elements, hydrogen and helium. Period 2 and period 3 
contain 8 elements each.
 Period 4 and period 5 contain 18 elements each. Period 6, the longest period, 
has 32 elements. Period 7, 31 elements. Period 7 element is radioactive and/or 
an	artifi	cial	element.
Except	for	the	fi	rst	period,	all	periods	start	with	an	alkali	metal	and	ends	with	
a noble gas.
Table 4.5The	number	of	elements	in	a	given	period	and	the	orbitals	being	fi	lled.
Period number Orbitals occupied Number of elements
1 1s 2
2 2s, 2p 8
3 3s, 3p 8
4 4s, 3d, 4p 18
and so on
The position of an element in a given period can be determined by the number of 
shells occupied with its electrons. Accordingly, the number of shell is equal to the 
number of period to which the element belongs.124Chemistr yGrade9 Periodic Classiﬁca tionofElements
Example 4.1
Electronic	confi	guration	of	23
11Na= 1s22s22p63s1 (2, 8, 1). Sodium has 3 main shells. 
Hence, sodium is found in period 3.
Example 4.2
By	looking	example	above	write	the	electron	confi	guration	of		9F and 17Cl. What are 
the	similarities	and	differences	in	the	electron	confi	guration	of	F	and	Cl?
Electronic	confi	guration	of	9F= 1s22s22p5	(2,	7)	and	the	electronic	confi	guration	of	
17Cl= 1s22s22p63s2 3p5 (2, 8, 7). Both have the same number of electrons in their 
valence shell. Flourine has two shells whereas chlorine has three shells .
Groups:  are the vertical columns of elements in the periodic table.  There are 18 
columns or groups in the modern periodic table. Group numbers are usually designated 
with the numbers 1 to 8 each followed by the letter A or B.
These are:
 IA . . . . . . . . . VIIIA Main groups (A groups)
 IB . . . . . . . . . VIIIB Sub groups (B groups)
Elements in a given group have the same number of outermost shell electrons. Elements 
in the same group have similar chemical properties. For the main group elements the 
group number equals the number of valence electrons.
Example 4.3
Electronic	confi	guration	of	35
17Cl = 1s22s22p63s23p5 (2, 8, 7). The number of valence 
electrons of chlorine is 7. Hence chlorine is found in Group VIIA.
4.3.3 Classiﬁ  cation of the Elements
Learning competencies
At the end of this section, you should be able to
explain	the	relationship	between	the	electronic	confi	guration	and	the	structure	
of the modern Periodic table
describe the three classes of the elements in the modern Periodic table
give group names for the main group elements
classify the periods into short, long and incomplete periods
tell the number of groups and periods in the modern Periodic table
tell the number of elements in each period
predict the period and group of an element from its atomic number
tell	the	block	and	group	of	an	element	from	its	electronic	confi	guration125Chemistr yGrade9 Periodic Classiﬁca tionofElements
The	assignment	of	all	the	electrons	in	an	atom	into	specifi	c	shells	or	orbitals	(s,	p,d,	f	)	
is known as the element’s electronic	confi	guration.	The	elements	can	be	arranged	in	the	
long	form	of	the	periodic	table	based	on	the	electronic	confi	guration	and	classifi	ed	as	
s, p, d and f-block elements. 
1. s-block elements : If the last electron enters into s-orbital, the elements are 
called as s-block elements.
The	general	valence	(outermost)	shell	electronic	confi	guration	is	given	by	ns1−2. 
That means  [IG] ns1 forAlkali metals and [IG] ns2 for Alkaline earth metals,
where IG represents the inert gas core.
2. p-bloc k elements : If the last electron enters into the p-orbital, the elements are 
called	as	p-block	elements.	The	general	valence	shell	electronic	confi	guration	is	
ns2np1- 6. The p-block elements are placed in Group number IIIA to VIIIA.
a. Valence shell electrons for s-block elements is equal to the number of electrons 
in the s orbital having the highest principal quantum number.
b. Valence shell electrons for p-block elements are equal to the number of electrons 
in the s and p orbitals having highest principal quantum number.
c. The total number of valence shell electrons is equal to its group number according 
to A and B convention.
d. He (ns2)	is	excluded	from	p-block	in	terms	of	electronic	confi	guration	and	it	is	
better to consider it as s-block element. But according to its chemical behavior it 
is	justifi	ed	to	place	it	in	Group	VIII.
3. d-block elements: If the last electron enters into d orbital, the elements are 
called d-block elements (except Thorium). The general valence shell electronic 
confi	guration	is:
ns0–2(n–1)d1–10
 or  ns1–2(n–1)d1–10 (except for palladium)
Total valence shell electrons of d-block elements = Total number of electrons in the 
outermost shell (ns orbital) and penultimate shell [(n – 1) d orbitals]. 
4. f-block elements : If the last electron of the elements enters into f-orbital, 
they are considered as f-block elements. The general valence shell electronic 
confi	guration	is:
  ns2 (n–1) d(0–1)(n–2)f(1–14)
Total valence shell electrons = Electrons present in ns, (n – 1)d and (n – 2)f orbitals or 
subshells.126Chemistr yGrade9 Periodic Classiﬁca tionofElements
Perform the following tasks in groups and present your conclusion to the class. 
For the following elements, determine the valence electrons, and identify the 
sub–shell (s, p, d or f ) in which the last electron of each element enters.
a. Nitrogen (atomic number = 7)
b. Sodium (atomic number = 11)
c. Silicon (atomic number = 14)
d. Iron (atomic number = 26)
e. Zinc (atomic number = 30)f. Krypton (atomic number = 36)
g. Cerium (atomic number = 58)Exercise 4.2
4.3.4 The Represen tative Elements
Referring to Figure 4.6 , the representative elements (also called main group elements) 
are	the	elements	in	Groups	IA	through	VIIA,	all	of	which	have	incompletely	filled	s	or	
p subshells of the highest principal quantum number. With the exception of helium, 
the	noble	gases	(the	Group	VIIIA	elements)	all	have	a	completely	filled	p	subshell.	
(The	electron	configurations	are	1s2 for helium and ns2np6 for the other noble gases, 
in which n is the principal quantum number for the outermost shell). some main groups 
have	traditional	names	and	others	as	family	of	the	fi	rst	member	in	the	group	which	
are often used in textbooks. Group I – alkali metals, Group II – alkaline earth metals, 
Group III - boron family, Group IV - carbon family, Group V - nitrogen family, Group 
VI - oxygen family, Group VII – halogens Group VIII – noble gases.
A	clear	pattern	emerges	when	we	examine	the	electron	configurations	of	the	elements	
in	a	particular	group.	The	electron	configurations	for	Groups	IA	and	IIA	elements	
are shown in Figure 4.6 . We see that all members of the Group IA alkali metals 
have	similar	outer	electron	configurations;	each	has	a	noble	gas	core	and	an	ns1	
configuration	of	the	outer	electron.	Similarly,	the	Group	IIA	alkaline	earth	metals	
have a noble gas core and an ns2	configuration	of	the	outer	electrons.	 The outer 
electrons of an atom, which are those involved in chemical bonding, are often called 
the valence electrons . Having the same number of valence electrons accounts for 
similarities in chemical behavior among the elements within each of these groups. This 
observation holds true also for the halogens (the Group VIIA elements), which have 
outer	electron	configurations	of	ns2np5 and exhibit very similar properties. We must be 
careful, however, in predicting properties for Groups IIIA through VIA. For example, 
the	elements	in	Group	IVA	all	have	the	same	outer	electron	configuration,	ns2np4, but 
there is much variation in chemical properties among these elements: Carbon is a 
nonmetal, silicon and germanium are metalloids, and tin and lead are metals. 127Chemistr yGrade9 Periodic Classiﬁca tionofElements
Figure 4.6	The	ground-state	electron	configurations	of	the	elements.	For	simplicity,	 only the 
configurations	of	the	outer	electrons	are	shown.128Chemistr yGrade9 Periodic Classiﬁca tionofElements
4.4 The Major Trends  in the Periodic Table
(Atomic size, ionization energy, electron afﬁ  nity and electro negativity)
Learning co mpetencies
At the end of this section, you should be able to describe the four major trends (atomic 
size, ionization energy,	electron	affi	nity	and	electro	negativity)	in	the	periodic	table.
In group discuss  why:
a. All the elements of a group have similar chemical 
properties.
b. All the elements of a period have different chemical 
properties.
c. The atomic radii of three elements A, B and C of a 
period of the periodic table are 186 pm, 104 pm 
and 143 pm respectively. Giving a reason, arrange 
these elements in the increasing order of atomic 
numbers in the period. Activity 4.4
Periodic trends are patterns in elements on the periodic table. Major trends are 
electronegativity,	ionization	energy,	electron	affi	nity,	atomic	radius,	and	metallic	
character. The existence of these trends is due to the similarity in atomic structure 
of the elements in their groups or periods and because of the periodic nature of 
elements.
As we have seen, the electron	configurations	of	the	elements	show	a	periodic	variation	
with increasing atomic number. Consequently, there are also periodic variations in 
physical and chemical behaviour. In this section and sections 4.5 and 4.6, we will 
examine some physical properties of elements that are in the same group or period 
and	additional	properties	that	inﬂuence	the	chemical	behavior	of	the	elements.	First,	
let’s look at the concept of effective nuclear charge, which has a direct bearing on 
atomic size and on the tendency for ionization.
4.4.1 Atom ic radius
Form a group and perform the following task. Present 
your	fi	ndings	to	the	class.
By Referring Figure 4.8  discuss in group what you observe 
on the trend in atomic radius and present your conclusion 
for the class. Activity 4.5129Chemistr yGrade9 Periodic Classiﬁca tionofElements
A number of physical properties, including density, melting point, and boiling point, 
are	related	to	the	sizes	of	atoms,	but	atomic	size	is	difficult	to	define.	When	we	must	
be	even	more	specific,	we	define	the	size	of	an	atom	in	terms	of	its	atomic	radius,	
which is one-half the distance between the two nuclei in two adjacent metal atoms.
For atoms linked together to form an extensive three-dimensional network, atomic 
radius is simply one-half the distance between the nuclei in two neighbouring atoms 
[Figure 4.7(a) ]. For elements that exist as simple diatomic molecules, the atomic radius 
is one-half the distance between the nuclei of the two atoms in a particular molecule 
[Figure 4.7(b) ].
    (a)               (b)
Figure 4.7	(a)	In	metals	such	as	beryllium,	the	atomic	radius	is	defined	as	one-half	the	
distance between the centers of two adjacent atoms. (b) For elements that exist as 
diatomic	molecules,	such	as	iodine,	the	radius	of	the	atom	is	defined	as	one-half	the	
distance between the centers of the atoms in the molecule.
Figure 4.8 shows the atomic radii of many elements according to their positions in the 
periodic table, and Figure 4.9 plots the atomic radii of these elements against their 
atomic numbers. Periodic trends are clearly evident. In studying the trends, bear in 
mind that the atomic radius is determined to a large extent by the strength of the 
attraction between the nucleus and the outer-shell electrons. Here the term effective 
nuclear charge instead of nuclear charge is used. Nuclear charge is the number of 
protons in the nucleus of an atom. Effective nuclear charge (Zeff ) is the magnitude of 
positive charge “experienced” by an electron in the atom. The larger the effective 
nuclear charge, the stronger the hold of the nucleus on these electrons, and the smaller 
the atomic radius. Consider the second-period elements from Li to F, for example. 
Moving	from	left	to	right,	we	fi	nd	that	the	number	of	electrons	in	the	inner	shell	(1s2) 
remains constant while the nuclear charge increases. Zeff increases from left to right 
across	a	period;	changes	very	little	down	a	column	The	electrons	that	are	added	to	
counterbalance the increasing nuclear charge are ineffective in shielding one another. 
Consequently, the effective nuclear charge increases steadily while the principal 
quantum number remains constant (n=2). For example, the outer 2s electron in lithium 
is shielded from the nucleus (which has three protons) by the two 1s electrons. As an 130Chemistr yGrade9 Periodic Classiﬁca tionofElements
approximation, we assume that the shielding effect of the two 1s electrons is to cancel 
two positive charges in the nucleus. Thus, the 2s electron only feels the attraction of 
one	proton	in	the	nucleus;	the	effective	nuclear	charge	is	+1.	In	beryllium	(1s22s2), 
each of the 2s electrons is shielded by the inner two 1s electrons, which cancel two of 
the four positive charges in the nucleus. Because the 2s electrons do not shield each 
other as effectively, the net result is that the effective nuclear charge of each 2s 
electron is greater than +1. Thus, as the effective nuclear charge increases, the atomic 
radius	decreases	steadily	from	lithium	to	ﬂuorine.
Within a group of elements w e	find	that atomic radius increases with increasing atomic 
number. For the alkali metals in Group 1A, the outermost electron resides in the ns 
orbital. Because orbital size increases with the increasing principal quantum number n, 
the size of the metal atoms increases from Li to Cs even though the effective nuclear 
charge also increases. We can apply the same reasoning to the elements in other 
groups.
Figure 4.8 Atomic radii (in picometers) o representative elements according to their 
positions in the periodic table. Note that there is no general agreement on the size of 
atomic radii. We focus only on the trends in atomic radii, not on their precise values.
Exampl e 4.4
Referring to a periodic table, arrange the following atoms in order of increasing 
atomic radius: P , Si, N.131Chemistr yGrade9 Periodic Classiﬁca tionofElements
Strategy What are the trends in atomic radii in a periodic group and in a particular 
period? Which of the preceding elements are in the same group? in the same period? 
Solution From Figure 4.8  we see that N and P are in the same group (Group VA). 
Therefore, the radius of N is smaller than that of P (atomic radius increases as we 
go down a group). Both Si and P are in the third period, and Si is to the left of P. 
Therefore, the radius of P is smaller than that of Si (atomic radius decreases as we 
move from left to right across a period). Thus, the order of increasing radius is  N < 
P < Si.
Arrange the following atoms in order of decreasing radius: C, Li, Be and give 
explanation to your arrangementExercise 4.3
Figure 4.9  Plot of atomic radii (in picometers) of elements against their atomic numbers.
4.4.2 Ionization Energy
Form a group and perform the following task. Present 
your	fi	ndings	to	the	class.
By Referring Table 4.6 and 4.7 discuss in group what 
you observe on the trend in Ionization energy and 
present your conclusion for the class.   Activity 4.6132Chemistr yGrade9 Periodic Classiﬁca tionofElements
Ionization energy is the quantity of energy that an isolated, gaseous atom in the 
ground electronic state must absorb to discharge an electron, resulting in a cation.
H(g) → H+(g) + e −               (1)
This energy is usually expressed in kJ/mol, or the amount of energy it takes for all the 
atoms in a mole to lose one electron each. 
When considering an initially	neutral	atom,	expelling	the	fi	rst	electron	will	require	
less energy than expelling the second, the second will require less energy than the 
third, and so on. Each successive electron requires more energy to be released. This is 
because	after	the	fi	rst	electron	is	lost,	the	overall	charge	of	the	atom	becomes	positive,	
and the negative forces of the electron will be attracted to the positive charge of the 
newly formed ion. The more electrons that are lost, the more positive this ion will be, 
the harder it is to separate the electrons from the atom.
In general, the further away an electron is from the nucleus, the easier it is for it to be 
expelled.	In	other	words,	ionization	energy	is	a	function	of	atomic	radius;	the	larger	
the radius, the smaller the amount of energy required to remove the electron from the 
outer most orbital. For example, it would be far easier to take electrons away from 
the larger element of Ca (Calcium) than it would be from one where the electrons are 
held tighter to the nucleus, like Cl (Chlorine).
As described ab ove, ionization energies are dependent upon the atomic radius. 
Since going from right to left on the periodic table, the atomic radius increases, and 
the ionization energy increases from left to right in the periods and up the groups. 
Exceptions to this trend is observed for alkaline earth metals (Group IIA) and nitrogen 
group elements (Group VA). Typically, Group IIA elements have ionization energy 
greater than Group IIIA elements and group VA elements have greater ionization 
energy than group VIA elements. Groups IIA and VA have completely and half-
fi	lled	electronic	confi	guration	respectively,	thus,	it	requires	more	energy	to	remove	an	
electron	from	completely	fi	lled	orbitals	than	incompletely	fi	lled	orbitals.
Figure 4.10  Trend of ionization energy in kJ/mol of period 2 elements.133Chemistr yGrade9 Periodic Classiﬁca tionofElements
Rank each set of the following elements in order of decreasing ionization 
energy and explain the trend in ionization energy of the elements down a 
group.
a. Ca,  Sr,  Mg,  Be
b. K,  Li,  Rb,  Na
c. Cl,  F,  I,  BrExercise 4.4
Alkali metals (Group IA) have small ionization energies, especially when compared to 
halogens or Group VIIIA (see Table 4.6 ). In addition to the radius (distance between 
nucleus and the electrons in outermost orbital), the number of electrons between the 
nucleus and the electron(s) you’re looking at in the outermost shell have an effect on 
the ionization energy as well. This effect, where the full positive charge of the nucleus 
is not felt by outer electrons due to the negative charges of inner electrons partially 
canceling out the positive charge, is called shielding. The more electrons shielding the 
outer electron shell from the nucleus, the less energy required to expel an electron 
from said atom. The higher the shielding effect the lower the ionization energy (see 
Table 4.7 ). It is because of the shielding effect that the ionization energy decreases 
from top to bottom within a group. From this trend, Cesium is said to have the lowest 
ionization energy and Fluorine is said to have the highest ionization energy (with the 
exception of Helium and Neon).
Table 4.6  showing the increasing trend of ionization energy in kJ/mol (exception in 
case of Boron) from left to right in the periodic table
Li Be B C N O F 
520 899 800 1086 1402 1314 1680
Table 4.7 showing decreasing trend of ionization energies (kJ/mol) from top to bottom 
(Cs	is	the	exception	in	the	fi	rst	group)	
Element Li Na K Rb Cs Fr 
Ionization 
energy520 496 419 408 376 396
Example 4. 5
(a)	Which	atom	should	have	a	smaller	first	ionization	energy:	oxygen	or	sulfur?	
(b) Which atom should have a higher second ionization energy: lithium or beryllium? 
Strategy (a) First ionization energy decreases as we go down a group because the 
outermost electron is farther away from the nucleus and feels less attraction. (b) 
Removal	of	the	outermost	electron	requires	less	energy	if	it	is	shielded	by	a	filled	
inner shell. 134Chemistr yGrade9 Periodic Classiﬁca tionofElements
Solutio n (a) Oxygen and sulfur are members of Group 6A. They have the same 
valence	electron	configuration	(ns2np4),	but	the	3p	electron	in	sulfur	is	farther	from	the	
nucleus and experiences less nuclear attraction than the 2p electron in oxygen. Thus, 
we	predict	that	sulfur	should	have	a	smaller	first	ionization	energy.
(b)	The	electron	configurations	of	Li	and	Be	are	1s22s1 and 1s22s2, respectively. The 
second ionization energy is the minimum energy required to remove an electron from 
a gaseous unipositive ion in its ground state. For the second ionization process we write
Li+(g) → Li2+(g) + e–
1s2      1s1
Be+(g) → Be2+(g) + e–
1s22s1      1s2
Because  1s electrons shield 2s electrons much more effectively than they shield each 
other, we predict that it should be easier to remove a 2s electron from Be+ than to 
remove a 1s electron from Li+
a. Which	of	the	following	atoms	should	have	a	larger	first	ionization	energy:	
N or P? 
b. Which of the following atoms should have a smaller second ionization 
energy: Na or Mg?          Exercise 4.5
4.4.3 Electron Afﬁnity
Electron	affi	nity	is	defi	ned	as the change in energy (in kJ/mole) of a neutral atom (in 
the gaseous phase) when an electron is added to the atom to form a negative ion. In 
other words, the neutral atom’s likelihood of gaining an electron.
Form a group and perform the following task. Present 
your	fi	ndings	to	the	class.
By Referring Figure 4.11 discuss in group what you 
observe	on	the	trend	in	electron	affi	nity	and	present	
your conclusion for the class.   Activity 4.7
Energy	of	an	atom	is	defi	ned	when	the	atom	loses	or	gains	energy	through	chemical
reactions that cause the loss or gain of electrons. A chemical reaction that releases 
energy is called an exothermic reaction and a chemical reaction that absorbs energy 
is called an endothermic reaction. Energy from an exothermic reaction is negative, 
thus	energy	is	given	a	negative	sign;	whereas,	energy	from	an	endothermic	reaction	
is positive and energy is given a positive sign. An example that demonstrates both 135Chemistr yGrade9 Periodic Classiﬁca tionofElements
processes is when a person drops a book. When he or she lifts a book, he or she gives 
potential energy to the book (energy absorbed). However, once the he or she drops 
the book, the potential energy converts itself to kinetic energy and comes in the form 
of sound once it hits the ground (energy released).
When an electron is added to	a	neutral	atom	(i.e.,	fi	rst	electron	affi	nity)	energy	
is	released;	thus,	the	fi	rst	electron	affi	nities	are	 negative . However, more energy is 
required	to	add	an	electron	to	a	negative	ion	(i.e.,	second	electron	affi	nity)	which	
overwhelms any the release of energy from the electron attachment process and 
hence,	second	electron	affi	nities	are	positive .
First	Electron	Affi	nity	(neg ative energy because energy released):
X(g) + e− → X− (g)     (1)
 Second Electron Affi	nity	 (positive energy because energy needed is more than 
gained):
X−(g) + e−→ X2−(g)     (2)
Ionization energies are always conce rned with the formation of positive ions. Electron 
affi	nities	are	the	negative	ion	equivalent,	and	their	use	is	almost	always	confi	ned	to	
elements	in	Groups	6	and	7	of	the	Periodic	Table.	The	fi	rst	electron	affi	nity	is	the	
energy released when 1 mole of gaseous atoms each acquire an electron to form 1 
mole of gaseous -1 ions. It is the energy released (per mole of X) when this change 
happens.	First	electron	affi	nities	have	negative	values.	For	example,	the	fi	rst	electron	
affi	nity	of	chlorine	is	-349	kJ	mol-1.	By	convention,	the	negative	sign	shows	a	release	
of energy.
When an electron is ad ded to a metal element, energy is needed to gain that electron 
(endothermic reaction). Metals have a less likely chance to gain electrons because it is 
easier to lose their valance electrons and form cations. It is easier to lose their valence 
electrons because metals’ nuclei do not have a strong pull on their valence electrons. 
Thus,	metals	are	known	to	have	lower	electron	affi	nities.
Example 4.6 	Group	I	Electron	Affi	nities
This	trend	of	lower	electron	affi	nities	for	metals	is	described	by	the	Group	I	metals:
 Lithium (Li):   -60 KJ mol-1
 Sodium (Na):  -53 KJ mol-1
 Potassium (K): -48 KJ mol-1
 Rubidium (Rb): -47 KJ mol-1
 Cesium (Cs):    -45 KJ mol-1
Notice that electron affi	nity	decreases  down the group.136Chemistr yGrade9 Periodic Classiﬁca tionofElements
When nonmetals gain electrons, the energy change is usually negative because they 
give	off	energy	to	form	an	anion	(exothermic	process);	thus,	the	electron	affi	nity	will	
be	negative.	Nonmetals	have	a	greater	electron	affi	nity	than	metals	because	of	their	
atomic	structures:	fi	rst,	nonmetals	have	more	valence	electrons	than	metals	do,	thus	it	
is	easier	for	the	nonmetals	to	gain	electrons	to	fulfi	ll	a	stable	octet	and	secondly,	the	
valence electron shell is closer to the nucleus, thus it is harder to remove an electron and 
it easier to attract electrons from other elements (especially metals). Thus, nonmetals 
have	a	higher	electron	affi	nity	than	metals,	meaning	they	are	more	likely	to	gain	
electrons	than	atoms	with	a	lower	electron	affi	nity.
Example 4.7  Group VIIA Electron	Affi	nities
For example, nonmetals like the elements in the halogens series in Group VIIA have a 
higher	electron	affi	nity	than	the	metals.	This	trend	is	described	as	below.	Notice	the	
negative	sign	for	the	electron	affi	nity	which	shows	that	energy	is	released.
 Fluorine (F) -328 kJ mol-1
 Chlorine (Cl) -349 kJ mol-1
 Bromine (Br) -324 kJ mol-1
 Iodine (I) -295 kJ mol-1
Notice that electron	affi	nity	decrea ses down the group, but increases across the 
period	from	left	to	right.	But	you	can	observe	there	is	irregularity	in	electron	affi	nity	
of	ﬂ	uorine	and	chlorine.	Why	is	electron	affi	nity	of	ﬂ	uorine	less	than	that	of	chlorine?
Solution:  Electron affi	nity	of	ﬂ	uorine is less than that of chlorine. This is due to the 
reason explained below:
Fluorine has seven electrons in 2p-subshell whereas chlorine has seven electrons in 
its 3p-subshell. 3p-subshell is relatively larger than 2p-subshell. Therefore, repulsion 
among	the	electrons	will	be	more	in	the	2p-shell	of	ﬂ	uorine	than	3p-subshell	in	chlorine.
Due	to	the	smaller	size	and	thus,	the	greater	electron-electron	repulsions,	ﬂ	uorine	will	
not accept an incoming electron with the same as chlorine. As a result, a lesser amount 
of energy is released when one electron is added into the 2p-subshell of F (g) to form 
F− (g) ion.
1. Why	does	the	electron	affi	nity	of	Cl	is	higher	than	that	of	F?
2. Explain	why	noble	gases	have	extremely	low	(almost	zero)	electron	affi	nities?
3. Explain	why	halogens	have	the	highest	electron	affi	nities?Exercise 4.6
137Chemistr yGrade9 Periodic Classiﬁca tionofElements
As	the	name	suggests,	electron	affi	nity	is	the	ability	of	an	atom	to	accept	an	electron.	
Unlike	electronegativity,	electron	affi	nity	is	a	quantitative	measurement	of	the	energy	
change that occurs when an electron is added to a neutral gas atom. The more 
negative	the	electron	affi	nity	value,	the	higher	an	atom’s	affi	nity	for	electrons.	 Figure 
4.11	shows	the	electron	affi	nity	trend.
Table 4.8	Showing	the	increasing	trend	of	electron	affi	nities	in	kJ/mol	(exception	in	
case of Beryllium and nitrogen) from left to right in the periodic table.
Element Li Be B C N O F 
Electron	Affi	nity -60 0 -27 -122 0 -141 -328
Table 4.9 Showing decreasin g	trend	of	Electron	affi	nities	(kJ/mol)	from	top	to	bottom
Element Li Na K Rb Cs
Electron	Affi	nity -60 -53 -48 -47 -45138Chemistr yGrade9 Periodic Classiﬁca tionofElements
Increasing	Electron	Affi	nityIncreasing	Electron	Affi	nity
  
Figure 4.11  Periodic Table sho wing	Electron	Affi	nity	Trend.139Chemistr yGrade9 Periodic Classiﬁca tionofElements
4.4.4 Electronegativity
Electronegativity
Form a group and perform the following task. Present 
your	fi	ndings	to	the	class.
The following values are given for electronegativity of 
period 3 elements: 2.1, 0.9, 1.5, 3.0, 1.8, 2.5 and 1.2
Based	on	the	information	given;
1. Draw	a	table	of	period	3	elements	and	fi	ll	with	the	
appropriate electronegativity values corresponding 
to the symbols of the elements.
2. Explain the reason for the observed trend.  Activity 4.8
The tendency of an atom in a molecule to attract the shared pair of electrons towards 
itself is known as electronegativity. It is a dimensionless property because it is only a 
tendency. It basically indicates the net result of the tendencies of atoms in different 
elements to attract the bond-forming electron pairs. We measure electronegativity 
on several scales. The most commonly used scale was designed by Linus Pauling. 
According	to	this	scale,	ﬂ	uorine	is	the	most	electronegative	element	with	a	value	of	
4.0 and cesium is the least electronegative element with a value of 0.7.
As we move across a period from left to right the nuclear charge increases and the 
atomic size decreases, therefore the value of electronegativity increases across a 
period in the modern periodic table. There is an increase in the atomic number as we 
move down the group in the modern periodic table. The nuclear charge also increases 
but the effect of the increase in nuclear charge is overcome by the addition of one 
shell. Hence, the value of electronegativity decreases as we move down the group. For 
example,	in	the	halogen	group	as	we	move	down	the	group	from	ﬂ	uorine	to	astatine	
the electronegativity value decreases.
Arrange each set of the given elements in order of decreasing electronegativity 
and explain the observed trend. 
a. Ba, Mg,  Be, Ca
b. C,   Pb,  Ge,  Si
c. Cl,  F,    I ,  BrExercise 4.7
It is a general observation that metals show a lower value of electronegativity as 
compared to the non-metals. Therefore, metals are electropositive and non-metals are 
electronegative in nature. The elements in period two differ in properties from their 
respective group elements (for example Li is different from Na, K, Rb, Cs and Fr) due 140Chemistr yGrade9
to the small size and higher value of electronegativity.
The elements in the second period show resemblance to the elements of the next group 
in period three. This happens due to a small difference in their electronegativities. This 
leads to the formation of a diagonal relationship (see section 4.2.2). 
Elements requiring few electrons to complete their valence shells and having few inner 
electron shells between nucleus and valence electrons, are the most electronegative. 
The	most	electronegative	of	all	elements	is	ﬂ	uorine.	Its	electronegativity	is	4.0.	Metals	
have electronegativity less than 2.0. The least electronegative elements are cesium 
(Cs) and francium (Fr), with electronegativity values of 0.7. Therefore, Fluorine is the 
most electronegative element and cesium is the least electronegative element.
Key Terms
 Atomic size 
Electron	affi	nity
 Electronegativity 
 Group 
 Ionization energy  Law of octaves
 Law of triads
 Lother Meyer’s curve
 Periodic law
 Period
Unit Summary
 Nineteenth-century chemists developed the periodic table by arranging elements 
in the increasing order of their atomic masses. Discrepancies in early versions 
of the periodic table were resolved by arranging the elements in order of their 
atomic numbers.
 The elements can be arranged in rows and columns by atomic number to form 
the periodic table. Elements in a given group (column) have similar properties. 
(A period is a row in the periodic table.) Elements on the left and at the center 
of	the	table	are	metals;	those	on	the	right	are	nonmetals.
Electron	configuration	determines	the	properties	of	an	element.	The	modern	
periodic	table	classifies	the	elements	according	to	their	atomic	numbers,	and	thus	
also	by	their	electron	configurations.	The	configuration	of	the	valence	electrons	
directly affects the properties of the atoms of the representative elements.
 Atomic radius varies periodically with the arrangement of the elements in the 
periodic table. It decreases from left to right and increases from top to bottom.
 Ionization energy is a measure of the tendency of an atom to resist the loss of 
an electron. The higher the ionization energy, the stronger the attraction between 
the nucleus and an electron. 
Electron	affinity	is	a	measure	of	the	tendency	of	an	atom	to	gain	an	electron.	The	
more	positive	the	electron	affinity,	the	greater	the	tendency	for	the	atom	to	gain	
an electron. Metals usually have low ionization energies, and nonmetals usually 
have	high	electron	affinities.
 Noble gases are very stable because their outer ns and np subshells are 
completely	filled.	Periodic Classiﬁca tionofElements141Chemistr yGrade9
 The metals among the representative elements (in Groups IA, IIA, and IIIA) tend 
to lose electrons until their cations become isoelectronic with the noble gases that 
precede them in the periodic table. 
 The nonmetals in Groups VA, VIA, and VIIA tend to accept electrons until their 
anions become isoelectronic with the noble gases that follow them in the periodic 
table.
 The tendency of an atom in a molecule to attract the shared pair of electrons 
towards itself is known as electronegativity. It is a dimensionless property because 
it is only a tendency. It basically indicates the net result of the tendencies of 
atoms in different elements to attract the bond-forming electron pairs.
Review Exercises
Part I: Basic level questions. 
Identify whether each of the following statements is true or false. Give your reasons 
when you consider a statement to be false.
1. The modern periodic law was proposed by Mosley. 
2. Elements across a period have consecutive atomic numbers. 
3. All	elements	with	high	ionization	energy	also	have	high	electron	affi	nity.	
4. As the atomic number of elements increases in the periodic table, their atomic 
radius also increases. 
5. Transition	metals	are	found	in	four	periods.	Each	corresponds	to	the	fi	lling	of	
valence electrons in the 3d, 4d, 5d, and 6d orbitals.  
PART II: Intermediate level questions.
Given below are multiple choice questions. Choose the best answer from the given 
alternatives.
6. The periodic law states that
a. similar properties recur periodically when elements are arranged 
according to increasing atomic number
b. similar properties recur periodically when elements are arranged 
according to increasing atomic weight
c. similar properties are everywhere on the periodic table
d. elements in the same period have same characteristics
7. Which element is most similar to Sodium
a. Potassium
b. Al uminumc. Oxygen
d. Calcium
8. Which element is most similar to Calcium?
a. Carbon
b. Oxygenc. Strontium
d. IodinePeriodic Classiﬁca tionofElementsChemistr yGrade9
142Chemistr yGrade9
9. Who were the two chemists that came up with the periodic law?
a. John Dalton and Michael Faraday
b. Dmitri Mendeleev and Lothar Meyer
c. Michael Faraday and Lothar Meyer
d. John Dalton and Dmitri Mendeleev
10. The	statement	that	is	not	true	about	electron	affi	nity	is
a. It causes energy to be released
b. It causes energy to be absorbed
c. It is expressed in electron volts
d. It involves formation of an anion
11. Which of the following is Dobereiner’s triad?
a. Ne, Ca, Na
b. H2, N2, O2c. Li, Na, K
d. Na, Br, Ar
12. Write the period number, group number and block of the element having atomic 
number 42.
a. 5, 5, d
b. 5, 6, dc. 5, 2, d
d. 5, 15, p
13. X, Y and Z are three consecutive elements. X on addition of one electron and Y 
on addition of two electrons become isoelectronic with element Z. Which of the 
following is the correct property of Element Y?
a. Atomic number of Y is higher than atomic number of Z.
b. Atomic number of Y is higher than atomic number of X.
c. Element Y is placed in periodic table at left side of element X if both are 
in same period.
d. None of these
To which grou p, period, and sublevel block do the following elements belong?
         Group          Period        Block type
Magnesium _______________ _______________ _______________
Phosphorous _______________ _______________ _______________
Krypton _______________ _______________ _______________
Manganese _______________ _______________ _______________
Gold  _______________ _______________ _______________
Potassium  _______________ _______________ _______________
PART IIV: Chalenge level questions.
Short Answer Type Questions. For the short answer questions below, give your responses.
14. Brieﬂy	describe	the	significance	of	Mendeleev’s	periodic	table.
15. What is Moseley’s contribution to the modern periodic table?
16. Describe the general layout of a modern periodic table.
17. What is the most important relationship among elements in the same group in 
the periodic table?Chemistr yGrade9 Chemistr yGrade9
UNIT/gid00022/gid00022
Unit Outcomes 
After completing the unit, you will be able to
discuss the formation of	ionic,	covalent	and	metallic	bonds;
explain the general properties of substances containing ionic, covalent and 
metallic	bonds;
develop the skills of drawing the electron dot or Lewis structures for simple 
ionic	and	covalent	compounds;
describe the origin of polarity within molecules.CHEMICAL BONDING 
144Chemistr yGrade9 Chemical Bonding
Students form groups and discuss on the following questions 
and present your discussion points to the class. 
1. What held together the Sun and other planets?
2. Is it possible for human beings to survive in the absence 
of gravitational force?
3. Why do most substances not exist in their elemental 
from?Start-up Activity
In Unit 3 we have discussed about the atomic structure. We have seen that a common 
atom contains a nucleus composed of protons and neutrons, with electrons in certain 
energy levels revolving around the nucleus. In this unit, the main focus will be on 
these electrons. Elements are distinguishable from each other due to their electrons. 
Because each element has a distinct number of electrons, this determines their chemical 
properties as well as the extent of their reactivity. In chemical bonding, only valence 
electrons, electrons located in the orbits of the outermost energy level (valence shell) 
of an element, are involved. The unit therefore deals with the way how the different 
types of chemical bonds are formed, the properties of compounds formed in each 
type of chemical bonding, and the formulas used to represent molecules or compounds 
formed in each type of chemical bonding.
5.1   Chemical Bonding 
At the end of this section, you will be able to
defi	ne	chemical	bonding
describe why atoms form chemical bonds.
Students, please form groups and discuss the following 
questions. Present your discussion points to the class. 
1. Most of the elements are not found in their atomic 
form. Do you know why this is so?
2. What binds atoms together to form compounds or 
molecules?
3. Do you know how atoms combine to form compounds 
or molecules? Activity 5.1
The material world in which we live is changing from time to time. This is due to the 
fact that nature is associated with innumerable chemical and physical changes. The 
chemical changes occur due to changes in the composition of the elements from which 
the materials are made of. We call these chemical changes, chemical reactions. As you 145Chemistr yGrade9 Chemical Bonding
have learned in your grade 7 science a chemical reaction involves change in molecular 
composition of a substance. It has been established that atom is the smallest particle 
of matter which takes part in a chemical reaction. Molecule is the smallest constituent 
particle of substance which has an independent existence and which represents the 
properties of the respective elements or compounds .
Why do atoms form chemical bond?
Most of the elements in nature have been found to exist in combined state. This is due 
to the fact that atoms of some elements are unstable by their own. There are, however, 
some atoms which have independent existence and are considered to be highly stable 
atoms. Except those of a few elements, the atoms of most of the elements have an 
inherent tendency to combine and form molecules or compounds. The combining atoms 
may belong to the same element or different elements. Within the molecules, the 
atoms are held together by attractive forces. A chemical bond  is, therefore, the force 
that holds atoms together to form molecules or compounds. 
Octet Rule
The American chemist Gilbert Lewis (1875-1946) used this observation to explain 
the types of ions and molecules that are formed by other elements. He called his 
explanation the octet rule. The octet rule states that atoms tend to form compounds in 
ways	that	give	them	eight	valence	electrons,	and	thus	the	electron	confi	guration	of	a	
noble gas (except helium). 
In the preced ing unit we have discussed about the valence electrons of the atoms of 
elements in each group in a periodic table. The valence electrons of all atoms are 
between 1and 8. Most elements follow the octet rule in chemical bonding, which 
means	that	an	element	should	have	eight	valence	electrons	in	a	bond	or	exactly	fi	ll	
up its valence shell. Having a total of eight valence electrons ensures that the atom is 
stable. This is the reason why noble gases, a valence electron shell of eight electrons, 
are	chemically	inert;	they	are	already	stable	and	tend	to	not	need	the	transfer	of	
electrons when bonding with another atom in order to be stable. 
How could atoms satisfy the Octet Rule?
There are three ways in which atoms can satisfy the octet rule.  
i. By losing valence electrons from an atom.
ii. By gaining valence electrons from other elements.  
iii. By sharing their valence electrons with other atoms.  
To become stable, atoms of metals tend to lose all of their valence electrons, which  
leave them with an octet.  For example, sodium, an alkali metal has 11 electrons and 
its	electronic	confi	guration	is	2,8,1.	In	order	to	fulfi	l	the	octet	rule,	sodium	needs	to	lose	
its		outermost	electron	and	hence	its	electronic	confi	guration	will	become	2,8.	
Atoms	of	non-metals,	on	the	other	hand,	tend	to	gain	electrons	in	order	to	fi	ll	their146Chemistr yGrade9 Chemical Bonding
outermost principal energy level with an octet. For example, oxygen being a non-
metallic	element	has	a	total	of	eight	electrons.	Its	electronic	confi	guration	will	be	
2,6. To attain eight valence electrons, oxygen must gain two additional electrons in 
its	valence	shell.	This,	therefore,	will	change	its	electronic	confi	guration	to	2,8	which	
fulfi	ls	octet.	Oxygen,	however,	can	do	this	by	sharing	its	two	valence	electrons	with	two	
electrons of another atom, which is known as sharing of electrons. 
Provide appropriate answer to the following questions
1. What	is	the	electronic	confi	guration	of	a	noble	gas?
2. Why	is	the	noble	gas	confi	guration	important?
3. Defi	ne	octet	rule.
4. Do most elements follow the octet rule?
5. How does hydrogen violate the octet rule?Exercise 5.1
5.2   Ionic Bonding 
In the preced ing section, we have discussed that  for atoms to become stable, they 
need to gain, lose or share their valence electrons. This losing, gaining or sharing of 
electrons by atoms  leads to chemical bonding. The result of chemical bonding will 
be the formation of molecules or compounds having different chemical and physical 
properties.	In	this	section,	fi	rst,	we	are	going	to	discuss	the	formation	of	ionic	bonding.	
This will be followed by the discussion about how to write chemical formula of ionic 
compounds using the Lewis formula. The section will also cover the discussion of the 
properties of ionic compounds. 
5.2.1  Formation of Ionic Bon ding
At the end of this section, you will be able to
explain	the	term	ion;
elucidate	the	formation	of	ions	by	giving	examples;
defi	ne	ionic	bonding;
describe the formation of an ionic bond.147Chemistr yGrade9 Chemical Bonding
Students, please form groups and discuss the following 
questions. Present your discussion points to the class.
1. What would happen to an atom when it gains or 
loses its valence electrons without combining with 
other atoms?
2. An electrically neutral atom has an equal number of 
negatively charged electrons and positively charged 
protons.	What	will	happen	to	the	charge	of	atom	‘A’	
if it has one more electron than its protons and atom 
‘B’	if	it	has	one	less	electron	number	than	its	protons?
3. What type of force holds atoms “A” and “B’’ together 
(refer question number two)? Activity 5.2
What are Ions?
In unit three, we have seen that an atom is a basic unit of matter that consists of a 
dense nucleus composed of positively charged protons and neutral neutrons, which is 
surrounded by a cloud of negatively charged electrons. An atom possessing the same 
number of protons and electrons, is electronically neutral. However, if the total number 
of electrons does not equal the number of protons, the atom has a net positive or 
negative electrical charge.
Any atom or molecule with a net charge, either positive or negative, is known as an ion. 
The positive electric charge of a proton is equal in magnitude to the negative charge 
of	an	electron;	therefore,	the	net	electric	charge	of	an	ion	is	equal	to	its	number	of	
protons minus its number of electrons.
Net electric charge = number of protons – number of electrons
Ions are highly reactive species. They are generally found in a gaseous state, and do 
not occur in abundance on Earth. Ions in the liquid or solid state are produced when 
salts interact with their solvents. They are repelled by like electric charges but are 
attracted to opposite charges.
Types of Ions
There	are	two	types	of	the	classifi	cations	of	ions	in	chemistry.	These	include	
i. classifi	cation	based	on	the	type	of	electric	charge	atoms	or	group	of	atoms	possess	
and 
ii. classifi	cation	based	on	the	number	of	atoms	involved	in	ion	formation.148Chemistr yGrade9 Chemical Bonding
In  chemistry, we classify ions based on the type of electric charge of atoms. These are
i. Anions : Are atoms or a group of atoms that have more electrons than protons and 
so have a net negative charge. Examples are Cl_, I_, SO42_, and NO3_.
ii. Cations : Are  atoms or a group of atoms that have more protons than electrons 
and so have a net positive charge. Examples are Na+, Ca2+, and Al3+.
Table 5.1 Cations and an ions of some metallic and non-metallic elements.
Element Proton Electron Charge Representation Proton Electron Ion
Hydrogen 1 1 0 H 1 0 H+
Sodium 11 11 0 Na 11 10 Na+
Magnesium 12 12 0 Mg 12 10 Mg2+
Aluminium 13 13 0 Al 13 10 Al3+
Nitrogen 7 7 0 N 7 10 N3_
Oxygen 8 8 0 O 8 10 O2_
Chlorine 17 17 0 Cl 17 18 Cl_
How Do Ions  Form?
Ions can be formed by ionization, which is the process of a neutral atom losing or 
gaining its valence electrons . Generally, the electrons are either added to or lost 
from	the	valence	shell	of	an	atom;	the	inner-shell	electrons	do	not	participate	in	this	
type of chemical interaction. Ionization generally involves a transfer of electrons 
between atoms or molecules. The process is driven by the achievement of more stable 
electronic	confi	gurations,	such	as	the	octet	rule.	Polyatomic	and	molecular	ions	can	
also be formed, generally by gaining or losing elemental ions, such as H+, in neutral 
molecules. Polyatomic ions are generally very unstable and reactive.
A common example of an ion is Na+ (read  as sodium cation or ion). According to 
Table 5.1, sodium has a +1 charge when it contains ten electrons (neutral sodium has 
11 electrons). However, according to the octet rule, sodium would be more stable 
with 10 electrons (2 in its  innermost shell, 8 in its outermost shell). We have said that 
metals lose electrons in order to attain  octet. Therefore, sodium metal tends to lose an 
electron to become more stable. On the other hand, chlorine, a non-metallic element 
tends to gain an electron to become Cl– (read as chloride ion). Chlorine naturally has 
17 electrons, but it would be more stable with 18 electrons (2 in its  innermost shell, 8 
in its second shell, and 8 in its valence shell). Therefore, chlorine will take an electron 
from another atom to become negatively charged. As a general rule, the charge of 
all group IA metals is 1+, group IIA metals is 2+, group VIIA nonmetals is -1. Group 
IIIA to VIA will not form an ionic bond in most cases, and they are not the topic of this 
section. 149Chemistr yGrade9 Chemical Bonding
Ionic Bonding
Let us consider the chemical bond that will be formed between sodium metal and 
chlorine. As we have discussed above, sodium will lose its outermost electron to attain 
octet and hence will become sodium cation (Na+;	2,8).	Chlorine	being	a		non-metal,	
accepts the electron sodium has lost and becomes a chloride ion (Cl_, 2,8,8). When 
the two oppositely charged ions come together, they will be held together by an 
electrostatic force and result in the formation of sodium chloride (NaCl), commonly 
known as table salt. A bond formed by two oppositely charged ions due to electrostatic 
force is known as an ionic bond . The process of forming such a bond is called ionic 
bonding . Figure 5.2 shows the formation of an ionic bond between sodium and chlorine 
atoms using atomic diagrams.
There is another alternative for sodium and  chlorine to attain the octet rule. Sodium, 
instead of losing its valence electron, needs to gain another seven electrons to its 
outermost shell in order to attain eight electrons on its valence shell. This, however, 
is	very	diffi	cult	to	be	achieved	by	sodium	because	metals	tend	to	lose	electrons.	
Secondly, gaining seven electrons needs a large amount of energy. Chlorine, on the 
other hand, is a non-metallic element  that tends to gain electrons than losing its 
outermost electrons. If chlorine wants to achieve the octet rule by losing its seven 
valence electrons, which of course is the second option, it needs a large amount of 
energy. It is, therefore, easy for sodium to lose one electron than gaining seven extra 
electrons on its valence shell. It will be easy for chlorine to gain one electron than 
losing	its	seven	valence	electrons	to	fulfi	l	the	octet	rule	likewise.		
Let us consider another example, the formation of an ionic bond between calcium and 
chlorine.	Calcium	with	atomic	number	20	has	an	electronic	confi	guration	of	2,8,8,2.	
In order to achieve octet, calcium removes its two valence electrons. This will make 
calcium a cation (Ca2+;	2,8,8)	because	the	number	of	electrons	is	less	by	2	than	the	
number of protons. Chlorine as we have discussed above, needs only one electron to 
fulfi	l	octet.	The	two	electrons	removed	from	calcium	will,	therefore,	be	received	by	
two chlorine atoms to make two chloride ions (2Cl_). One calcium cation (Ca2+) will 
be attracted by the two chloride ions (2Cl_) resulting in calcium chloride (CaCl2). The 
atomic diagram in Figure 5.3  depicts the ionic bond formation between calcium and 
chlorine.
As a general rule, ionic bond is formed between a metallic and a non-metallic  elements. 
For atoms with the largest electronegativity differences (such as metals bonding with 
non-metals), the bonding interaction is called ionic, and the valence electrons are 
typically represented as being transferred from the metal atom to the non-metal. 
Once the electrons have been transferred to the non-metal, both the metal and the 
non-metal are considered to be ions. The two oppositely charged ions electrostatically 
attract each other to form an ionic compound.150Chemistr yGrade9 Chemical Bonding
Provide the appropriate answer to the following questions.
1. Defi	ne	the	terms	cation	and	anion.
2. How do cations and anions form?
3. What is a chemical bond?
4. How are ionic bonds formed?
5. An aluminium atom has three valence electrons. Do you think it will lose 
three	electrons	or	gain	fi	ve	electrons	to	obtain	an	octet	in	its	outermost	
electron shell? Why?
6. An iodine atom has seven valence electrons. Do you think it will lose seven 
electrons or gain one electron to obtain an octet in its outermost electron 
shell?
7. Describe the formation of potassium iodide.Exercise 5.2
5.2.2 Lewis Formulas of Ionic Compounds 
At the end of this section, you will be able to
give	examples	of	simple	ionic	compounds;
draw Lewis structures or electron-dot formulas of simple ionic compounds.
Students, please form groups and discuss the following 
questions. Present your discussion points to the rest of 
the class.
1. What would you do to describe an orange for 
a person who has never  seen orange in his/her 
entire life? 
2. Why is it important to have a common way of 
representing substances?
3. Why do you think it is important to use a common 
formula of ionic compounds?   Activity 5.3
Lewis Dot Formula
To explain the various types of bonds and to visualise the change in the valence 
electrons, the American physical chemist Gilbert N. Lewis (1916) proposed the Lewis 
dot formula. 151Chemistr yGrade9 Chemical Bonding
Figure 5.1  Picture of the American Physical Chemist Gilbert N. Lewis (1875-1046).
In the Lewis symbol for an atom, the chemical symbol of the element with their valence 
electrons is represented as dots surrounding it. Only the electrons in the valence level 
are shown using this notation. The number of dots equals the number of valence 
electrons in the atom. These dots are arranged to the right and left and above and 
below the symbol, with no more than two dots on a side ( Table 5.2).
Table 5.2 The Lewis symbols f or the elements of the third period of the periodic table.
Lewis symbols can also be used to illustrate the formation of cations from atoms, for 
sodium and calcium as shown below:
Likewise, they can be used to show the formation of anions from atoms, as shown 
below for chlorine and sulphur:
152Chemistr yGrade9 Chemical Bonding
Table 5.3 Lewis symbols showing the transfer of electrons during the formation of ionic 
compounds.
Some examples of the Lewis dot formulas of ionic compounds are shown in Table 5.3 . 
The Lewis dot formula can also be represented using the atomic diagram as shown in 
Figures 5.2  and 5.3. The dots on the atomic diagram represent the electrons. 
Figure 5.2 An atomic diagram showing the formation of ionic compound (NaCl) 
between the atoms of sodium and chlorine.
Figure 5.3  An atomic diagram showing ionic compound (CaCl2) formation between 
calcium and chlorine.153Chemistr yGrade9 Chemical Bonding
Provide the appropriate answer for the following questions.
1. Draw the Lewis dot structures for each of the following molecules:   
a. H2S  
b. CH2Br2  c. HCN
d. K2O e. Al2O3
2. In the Lewis structures listed below, M and X represent various elements in 
the third period of the periodic table. Write the formula of each compound 
using the chemical symbols of each element:
 a. 
  b. 
   c.
  d. 
Exercise 5.3
5.2.3 Gener al Properties  of Ionic Compounds 
At the end of this section, you will be able to
describe	the	general	properties	of	ionic	compounds;
investigate the properties of given samples of ionic compounds.
Students, please form groups and discuss the 
following questions in your respective groups. Present 
your discussion points to the rest of the class.
1. How do you express your friend’s behaviour and 
physical appearance?
2. If you are given juices made up of lemon, grape 
and  orange without letting you know, how do you 
differentiate the juices? 
3. Is there any way that you can differentiate ionic 
compounds from  other compounds?    Activity 5.4
Ionic compounds contain ionic bonds. An ionic bond is formed when there is a large 
electronegativity difference between the elements participating in the bond formation. 
The greater the electronegativity differences among the bonding atoms, the stronger 
the attraction between cation and anion. The properties of ionic compounds depend 
on how strongly the cations and anions attract each other in an ionic bond. Based on 
the above behaviour, iconic compounds exhibit the following properties:
They Form Crystals
As we know substances can exist in one of the three states, namely solid, liquid, or 
gas. A solid-state substance can exist as powder, crystal, or amorphous. Most ionic 
compounds exist in crystalline solid form. The constituent particles of the crystals are 154Chemistr yGrade9 Chemical Bonding
ions, not molecules. The opposite charged ions in ionic compounds are held together 
very strongly by electrostatic force of attraction. Hence the ionic compounds are 
generally hard solids.  At an atomic level, an ionic crystal forms a regular structure, 
with the cation and anion alternating with each other and forming a three-dimensional  
structure-based,	largely,	on	the	smaller	ion	uniformly	fi	lling	in	the	empty	spaces	
between the larger ions  (Figure 5.4 ).
Cl-Na+
Figure 5.4  The crystal structure of sodium chloride (NaCl).
They have high Melting Points and High Boiling Points.
Considerable heat energy is required to separate the strong electrostatic attraction 
force between the positive and negative ions in ionic compounds. Therefore, a high 
temperature is required to melt and boil ionic compounds. The process of melting an 
ionic compound requires the addition of large amounts of energy in order to break all 
of the ionic bonds in the crystal and let the ions move freely. For example, breaking 
the ionic bonds in sodium chloride to make it melt requires a temperature of about 
800oC. We call this temperature, melting point. It requires a very high temperature-
1465°C to boil sodium chloride. Boiling a substance means converting its constituents 
into a gaseous form.
They are Hard and Brittle
Ionic crystals are hard because the positive and negative ions are strongly held 
together by electrostatic attraction force. It takes a large amount of mechanical force, 
such as striking a crystal with a hammer, to force one layer of ions to shift relative to 
its neighbour. Such striking brings ions of the same charge next to one another (Figure 
5.5). The strong repulsive forces between like-charged ions cause the crystal to break. 
The property of being hard but liable to be broken is known as brittleness.  155Chemistr yGrade9 Chemical Bonding
Figure 5.5  Appearance of sodium chloride crystal before and after hitting.
The sodium chloride crystal is shown in two dimensions (Figure 5.5, left). When struck 
by a hammer, the negatively-charged chloride ions are forced near one another and 
the repulsive force causes the crystal to shatter ( Figure 5.5 , right).
They are Soluble in Polar Solvents
The solubility of a substance is the maximum amount of solute that can dissolve in 
a given quantity of solvent. Solubility depends on the chemical nature of both the 
solute and the solvent, and the temperature and pressure. One way of classifying 
solvents is into polar and non-polar. Polar solvents dissolve polar compounds and non-
polar solvents dissolve non-polar compounds. This is commonly referred to as “like 
dissolves like”. A polar solvent is a type of solvent that has large partial charges. 
Water,	methanol,	liquid	ammonia,	liquid	hydrogen	ﬂ	uoride,	acetone	and	ethanol	are	
common examples of polar solvent. There are, however, several ionic compounds that 
are insoluble in water. Most salts of carbonates, oxalates, phosphates, sulphides and 
hydroxides are insoluble in water.
They Conduct Electricity w hen they are Dissolved in Water or in Molten State
Melting and dissolving ionic compounds makes cations and anions free to move. Since 
the ions are free charged particles, they move towards the respective electrodes 
under	the	inﬂ	uence	of	electric	fi	eld	and	conduct	electricity	through	the	solution.	Molten	
ionic compounds also conduct electricity. For example: sodium chloride (NaCl) in its 
molten state releases sodium cation (Na+) and chloride anion (Cl_) as shown below:
NaCl    →    Na+    +    Cl_
In an electrolytics cell, the sodium cation moves to the negative electrode (cathode), 
and the chloride anion moves towards the positive electrode (anode). This causes 
complete movement of charge across the circuit.156Chemistr yGrade9 Chemical Bonding
Figure 5.6  In an ionic solution, the A+ ions migrate toward the negative electrode, 
while the B− ions migrate toward the positive electrode. 
Experiment 5.1 
Conductivity of Ionic Compounds
Objective: In this experiment, we are going to see whether a distilled water, solid table 
salt (NaCl) or a water solution of table salt conduct electricity or not.
Materials : Distilled water (100 mL), table salt (60 g), three 25 mL beakers, battery, 
copper wire, two pieces of metallic rods or graphite rod, small electric bulb.
Procedure:
1. Take a 25 mL beaker and add 15 mL distilled water. 
2. Take 20 g table salt (NaCl) and add it into the second beaker.
3. Dissolve 30 g of table salt (NaCl) in 50 mL distilled water. Add 25 mL of the solution 
into the third 25 mL beaker.
4. Assemble each of the beakers as shown in Figure 5.7  below, turn by turn and see 
what happens to the electric bulb in each case.
(a)                 (b)                    (c) 
Figure 5.7	A)	Distilled	water;	B)	Solid	table	salt;	C)	A	water	solution	of	table	salt.
157Chemistr yGrade9 Chemical Bonding
Observation and analysis questions
Provide answers to the following questions based on the above experiment.
1. In which case did the electric bulb light?
2. Why the electric bulb did not light in the other two cases?
3. What do you conclude from this observation?
They Have High Density
The density of a substance is the amount of a substance per unit volume. It is one of 
the physical properties by which substances differ. The oppositely charged ions in an 
ionic compound are held closely by the electrostatic force of attraction. Hence, the 
number of ions per unit volume in an ionic compound is high,  which in turn  makes their 
density high.
Provide appropriate answers to the following questions
1. State	the	fi	ve	general	properties	of	ionic	compounds.
2. Why do ionic compounds form crystals?
3. If a compound dissolves in water, will it be a proof for the ionic nature of 
the compound? Why?
4. Why that ionic compounds do conduct electricity in the molten state or when 
dissolved in water but not in the solid- state? Exercise 5.4
5.3   Covalent Bonding 
We have thoroughly discussed that in order to become stable, atoms of elements need 
to	fulfi	l	the	octet	rule.	Except	for	the	noble	gases,	all	the	second	raw	elements	obey	
the octet rule either by gaining, losing or sharing electrons. In the preceding section, 
we have seen how atoms become stable by losing and gaining electrons. In this section, 
we shall discuss the second type of bonding known as covalent bonding , the Lewis dot 
formulas of covalent molecules, polarity in covalent molecules, coordinate covalent 
bond, and general properties of covalent compounds.
5.3.1 Formation of Covalent Bond 
At the end of this section, you will be able to
defi	ne	covalent	bonding;
describe the formation of a covalent bond.158Chemistr yGrade9 Chemical Bonding
Students, please form groups and discuss the following 
questions. Present a summary of your discussion points 
to the class.
1. An ionic bond is an electrostatic attraction force 
between a cationic and an anionic species. Is there 
another way through which two non-metallic atoms 
form a bond?
2. What kind of force holds the atoms together in 
compounds other than ionic? 
3. How do the molecules H2, O2, HCl, and H2S form?  Activity 5.5
A covalent bond consists of the simultaneous attraction of two nuclei for one or more 
pairs of electrons. In other words, a covalent bond is formed when two atoms share 
one or more electron pairs. The electrons residing between the two nuclei are known 
as the bonding electrons. In this type of bond, each shared electron will be counted 
by both atoms’ valence shells in order to satisfy the octet rule. Based on the number 
of	pairs	of	shared	electrons,	the	covalent	bonds	formed	can	be	classifi	ed	into	three:
i. Single bo nd: one pair of electrons is shared 
ii. Double bond : share two pairs of electrons and 
iii. Triple bond : share three pairs of electrons. 
Generally, bonds sharing more than one pair of electrons are called multiple covalent 
bonds . Covalent bonds occur between identical atoms or between different atoms 
whose	difference	in	electronegativity	is	insuffi	cient	to	allow	the	transfer	of	electrons	
to form ions.
Formation of Single Covalent Bond
Let’s consider the covalent bond in the hydrogen molecule (H2). A hydrogen molecule 
is formed from two hydrogen atoms, each with one electron in its valence shell. The 
two hydrogen atoms are attracted to the same pair of electrons in the covalent bond. 
The bond is represented either as a pair of “dots” or as a solid line. Each hydrogen 
atom	acquires	a	helium-like	electron	confi	guration.	Such	a	type	of	bond	is	known	as	a	
single bond ( Figure 5.8 ).
H.    +    .H    →    H :H or H – H  
The alternative way of showing the above covalent bond formation would be the 
following:
Two hydrogen atoms a hydrogen molecule, H2
a shared pair of electrions
Figure 5.8  Atomic  diagram  showing the formation of covalent bond in hydrogen  
molecule (H2).159Chemistr yGrade9 Chemical Bonding
There exists an attraction force between the positively charged nuclei and the 
negatively charged bonding electrons, but there is also a repulsive force between 
the two positively charged nuclei as well as between the two negatively charged 
electrons. Figure 5.9  shows these attractive and repulsive forces between the two 
hydrogen atoms. 
Figure 5.9 A scheme showing the nuclei-shared electron attractive forces (green double 
arrow) and the electron-electron and nucleus-nucleus repulsive forces (red double 
arrow). ea and eb are electrons of Ha and Hb respectively.
The attractive forces are equal in magnitude, but opposite in sign. Each hydrogen 
nucleus attracts both electrons. The net result is that the energy of the molecule becomes 
less than the atomic energies when the bond forms.
The two chlorine atoms in the chlorine molecule (Cl2) are joined by a shared pair of 
electrons. Each chlorine atom contains seven valence electrons in the valance shell 
and	requires	one	more	electron	to	form	an	argon-like	electron	confi	guration	and	
become stable (Figure 5.10 ). The two chlorine atoms achieve this if each chlorine atom 
contributes one electron to the bonding pair shared by the two atoms. The remaining 
six valence electrons of each chlorine atom are not involved in bond formation and 
are located around their respective atoms. These valence electrons, normally shown as 
pairs of electrons, are commonly known as non bonding electrons, lone pair electrons, 
or unshared electron pairs .
Figure 5.10  Atomic diagram showing formation of chlorine molecule (Cl2).
Single covalent bonds can also occur between two different atoms. For example, 
hydrogen sulphide (H2S) is formed when two hydrogens, each share their valence shell 
electrons to one sulphur atom. Sulphur is a group VIA element and it has 6 valence 
electrons.	In	order	to	fi	ll	its	outermost	shell	with	eight	electrons,	it	needs	two	more	
electrons, in this case, two valence electrons shared by the two hydrogens. The two 
hydrogens	will	have	an	electronic	confi	guration	similar	to	that	of	helium	which	makes	160Chemistr yGrade9 Chemical Bonding
them stable enough (the duet rule) whereas the sulphur atom will attain the electronic 
confi	guration	of	argon	that	makes	it	stable.
Provide appropriate answers to the following questions.
1. Defi	ne	a	covalent	bond.
2. Why the nuclei of the two covalently bonded atoms do not collide during 
the formation of a covalent bond?
3. In covalently bonded atoms, what holds the two atoms together?
4. Describe the formation of H2O, F2, CF4, and NH3.Exercise 5.5
Formation of  Multiple Covalent Bonds
Students, please form groups and discuss the following 
questions. Present your discussion points to the class.
1. Is there another possible way through which two 
atoms or groups of atoms form a covalent bond 
other than a single bond?
2. Atom “A” has a total of eight electrons and atom 
“B” has a total of seven electrons. How do A2 and 
B2 form?
3. What do you call the covalent bond formed in A2
and B2?
4. Can you construct a model that shows A2 and Bw2, 
from locally available materials?  Activity 5.6
Formation of Double Bond
An oxygen molecule would be a good example for a double covalent bond formation. 
Atmospheric air consists of 21% of life-giving gas known as oxygen. Oxygen is a 
group VIA element with 6 valence electrons. Each oxygen atom requires two electrons 
to	fulfi	l	the	octet	rule.	The	two	oxygen	atoms,	therefore,	need	to	share	two	electrons	
each	so	that	they	could	attain	the	nearest	noble	gas	electronic	confi	guration,	neon.	
Since two pairs of electrons are shared between the two oxygen atoms in an oxygen 
molecule, such a type of bond is known as a double bond. The four pairs of electrons 
that do not participate in bonding and are situated on the two oxygens atoms in O2
are the lone pair electrons (Figure 5.11 ). 161Chemistr yGrade9 Chemical Bonding
Figure 5.11  Atomic diagram that shows formation of oxygen molecule (O2).
Formation of Triple Covalent Bon d
Nitrogen is a group VA element. It has 5 valence electrons. We know that 78% of 
the	atmosphere	is	fi	lled	with	the	element	nitrogen.	Nitrogen	exists	in	its	molecular	
form	which	will	not	be	stable,	otherwise.	This	stability	could	be	achieved	by	fulfi	lling	
the octet rule. To do so each nitrogen atoms shares three electrons each to have the 
nearest	noble	gas	(neon)	electronic	confi	guration	which	makes	it	stable.	The	sharing	
of three pairs of electrons in a covalent bond results in a triple bond. The pairs of 
electrons on the valence shells of the two nitrogen atoms in the N2 are the lone pair 
electrons (Figure 5.12 ).
Figure 5.12  Atomic diagram of the formation of nitrogen molecule (N2).
Provide appropriate answer to the following questions.
1. How many different types of covalent bonds have you known so far?
2. Describe the formation of carbon dioxide (CO2), ethylene (H4C2), and 
acetylene (H2C2) molecules.Exercise 5.6
5.3.2 Le wis’s Formula of Co valent Molecules
At the end of this section, you will be able to
draw	Lewis	structures	or	electron-dot	formulas	of	simple	covalent	molecules;
give	examples	of	different	types	of	covalent	molecules;
make models of covalent molecules show single, double and triple bonds using 
sticks and balls or from other locally available materials.162Chemistr yGrade9 Chemical Bonding
Students, please form groups and discuss the following 
questions. Present your discussion points to the class.
1. In the previous section, we discussed writing Lewis’s 
formulas of ionic compounds. How can one write 
Lewis’s formula of a covalent molecule?
2. Using the same analogy, write the Lewis formulas of 
the covalent molecule HCN.
3. How many bonding and lone pair electrons are 
there in HCN?
4. How many single, double and triple covalent bonds 
are there in HCN?Activity 5.7
In section 5.2.2, we discussed about Lewis’s formula of ionic compounds. We also  used 
Lewis’s formula to indicate the formation of covalent bonds, which are shown in Lewis 
structures, drawings that describe the bonding in molecules.
The number of bonds that an atom can form can often be predicted from the number 
of electrons needed to reach an octet. This is especially true of the non-metals of 
the second period of the periodic table (C, N, O, and F). For example, each atom of 
group IVA element has four electrons in its outermost shell and therefore requires four 
more electrons to reach an octet. These four electrons can be gained by forming four 
covalent bonds, as illustrated below for carbon in CCl4 (carbon tetrachloride) and 
silicon in SiH4	(silane).	Because	hydrogen	only	needs	two	electrons	to	fi	ll	its	valence	
shell (duat rule), it is an exception to the octet rule.
Group	VA	elements	such	as	nitrogen	have	fi	ve	valence	electrons	in	the	atomic	Lewis	
symbol: one lone pair and three unpaired electrons. To achieve an octet, these atoms 
form three covalent bonds, as in NH3 (ammonia).
 or 
Oxygen and other atoms in group VIA achieve an octet by forming two covalent 
bonds. For very simple molecules, we can write the Lewis structures by merely pairing 
up the unpaired electrons on the constituent atoms. Look at these examples in Table 
5.5.163Chemistr yGrade9 Chemical Bonding
Table 5.5 Lewis’s formula of some simple covalent molecules.
Element/molecule Dot formula Line formula
Hydrogen H:H H_H
Nitrogen :N:::N: :N≡N:
Oxygen
::O:
::O:
: :O
: :O
Chlorine
:::Cl :
::Cl:
:::Cl 
::Cl:
Water
::H:O:H
::H   O   H
Ethene
Acetylene  H:C:::C:H H   C   C   H
Formaldehyde
Provide the appropriate answer to the following questions.
1. Write the Lewis structure for the diatomic molecule P2, an unstable form of 
phosphorus found in high-temperature phosphorus vapor.
2. Write Lewis structures for the following:
a. O2b. H2CO c. AsF3
3. Construct models for CH4, O2, N2, H2C2 molecules from locally available 
materials.Exercise 5.7
5.3.3 Polarity in Covalent Molecules 
At the end of this section, you will be able to
discuss	the	polarity	in	covalent	molecules;
distinguish between polar and non-polar covalent molecules.164Chemistr yGrade9 Chemical Bonding
Students, please form groups and discuss the following 
questions. Present your discussion points to the class.
1. Why is table salt soluble in water but not in oil?
2. What does electronegativity difference do to the 
electron distribution of atoms that are covalently 
bonded?
3. What would be the electron distribution of a 
covalent bond formed from two atoms having 
similar electronegativities? Activity 5.8
The existence of a 100% ionic or covalent bond represents an ideal situation. In 
reality no bond or a compound is either completely covalent or ionic. Even in case of 
covalent bond between two diatomic molecules, there is some ionic character.
When covalent bond is formed between two similar atoms, for example in H2 , O2 , 
Cl2 , N2 or F2 the shared pair of electrons is equally attracted by the two atoms. As a 
result electron pair is situated exactly between the two identical nuclei. The bond so 
formed is called nonpolar covalent bond. Contrary to this in case of a heteronuclear 
molecule like HF, the shared electron pair between the two atoms gets displaced more 
towards	ﬂ	uorine	since	the	electronegativity	of	ﬂ	uorine	(as	you	have	learned	in	unit	4)	
is far greater than that of hydrogen. The resultant covalent bond is a polar covalent 
bond.
Nonpolar Covalent Molecules
Let us consider the homonuclear diatomic molecule H2. In a molecule like H2, in which 
the atoms are identical, we expect the electrons to be equally distributed between the 
two atoms. The two hydrogens have equal electronegativity (2.1), and the difference 
between the electronegativities will be zero. Therefore, according to the guideline, 
the covalent bond in H2 is  non-polar. Generally, all homoatomic molecules like O2, N2, 
Cl2are non-polar covalent molecules. 
Let us consider the heteronuclear polyatomic molecule ethane (C2H6). There are two 
different types of covalent bonds in ethane i.e., H-C and C-C. Considering the above 
guideline, the electronegativity value difference between hydrogen (2.1) and carbon 
(2.5) will be 0.4, which is below the minimum value for a polar covalent bond. The C-C 
bond is non-polar because there is no electronegativity value difference between the 
two carbons. Hence, ethane is a nonpolar covalent molecule. 
Other examples of non-polar molecules  include any of the homonuclear diatomic 
elements (H2, N2, O2, Cl2 which are truly non-polar molecules), carbon dioxide 
(CO2), benzene (C6H6), carbon tetrachloride (CCl4), methane (CH4), ethylene (C2H4). 
hydrocarbon liquids (gasoline and toluene), and most organic molecules.165Chemistr yGrade9 Chemical Bonding
Non-polar molecules also form when atoms sharing a polar bond arrangement such 
that the electric charges cancel out each other. For example, in CO2 and CCl4 the 
individual C-O and C-Cl bonds are polar. This is because, in the case of C-O bond 
the electronegativity value difference between carbon (2.5) and oxygen (3.5) is 1.0. 
Hence, the bond is polar. Similarly, in C-Cl bond the electronegativity value difference 
between carbon (2.5) and chlorine (3.0) is 0.5, which is the minimum value requirement 
for a polar covalent bond. However, in CO2 the molecular structure is linear O=C=O 
and the charges on the two oxygen atoms cancel out each other as they are oriented 
in the opposite directions (see below) making the molecule non-polar. In the case of 
CCl4, the chlorines arrange themselves in a tetrahedral geometry (see below) around 
the carbon atom , and each partial charge on the four chlorine atoms will cancel out 
each other. This made CCl4 a nonpolar covalent molecule. 
    
   
Polar Covalent Molecules
In many covalent bonds the electrons are not shared equally between two bonded 
atoms. For example, in hydrogen chloride the electrons are unevenly distributed 
between the two atoms because the atoms that share the electrons in the molecule 
are different and have different electronegativities. Electronegativity is the tendency 
of an atom to pull bonding electrons toward it. A bond in which electrons are shared 
unevenly is called a polar bond or polar covalent bond. A polar bond has a slight 
positive charge on one end and a slight negative charge on the other end. The greater 
the difference in electronegativity between the bonded atoms, the more polar the 
bond will be. The direction of bond polarity can be indicated with an arrow. The head 
of	the	arrow	is	at	the	negative	end	of	the	bond;	a	short	perpendicular	line	near	the	
tail of the arrow marks the positive end of the bond.
A polar molecule is a molecule containing polar bonds where the sum of all the 
partial charges is not zero. Polar bonds form when there is a difference between 
the electronegativity values of the atoms participating in a bond. Polar molecules 
also form when the spatial arrangement of chemical bonds leads to a more positive 
charge on one side of the molecule than the other.
The HCl bond and other polar bonds can be thought of as beingintermediate between 
a non-polar covalent bond, in which the sharing of electrons isexactly equal, and an 
ionic bond, in which the transfer of the electron(s) is nearly complete.166Chemistr yGrade9 Chemical Bonding
Let us consider one more example, a water molecule H2O. The  electronegativity value 
difference between oxygen and hydrogen (3.5-2.1 = 1.4) tells us the H-O bond is 
polar. The magnitude of the electronegativity difference tells us how strongly polar 
the H-O bond is. Unlike CO2, the shape of a water molecule is a bent or V-shape and 
unlike CO2 the net charge in H2O will not cancel out each other. Thus, water is a polar 
covalent molecule.                 
Other examples of polar molecules include ammonia (NH3), sulfur dioxide (SO2), 
hydrogen	sulfi	de	(H2S), methanol (CH4O), and ethanol (C2H6O).
The Distinction between Polar and Non-polar Covalent Bond and Ionic Bond
There is no sharp distinction between a polar covalent bond and an ionic bond, 
but the following rules are helpful as a rough guide. An ionic bond results when 
the electronegativity difference between the two bonding atoms is 2.0 or more. 
This rule applies to most ionic compounds. A polar covalent bond forms when the 
electronegativity difference between the atoms is in the range 0.5-2.0. If the 
electronegativity	difference	is	below	0.5,	the	bond	is	normally	classifi	ed	as	a	covalent	
bond, with little or no polarity. Generally, ionic compounds are highly polar. Atoms of 
elements with comparable electronegativities tend to form moderately polar covalent 
bonds with each other because the shift in electron density is usually small. Atoms of 
the same element, which have the same electronegativity, can be joined by a pure 
nonpolar covalent bond.
Example
Classify the following bonds as ionic, polar covalent, or covalent: 
a. The bond in HCl, 
b. The bond in KF, and 
c. The CC bond in H3CCH3.
Strategy: We follow the 2.0 rule of electronegativity difference and look up the 
values in Table 5.7.
Solution:
a. The electronegativity difference between H and Cl is 0.9, which is appreciable 
but not large enough (by the 2.0 rule) to qualify HCl as an ionic compound. 
Therefore, the bond between H and Cl is polar covalent.
b. The electronegativity difference between K and F is 3.2, which is well above the 
2.0	mark;	therefore,	the	bond	between	K	and	F	is	ionic.
c. The two C atoms are identical in every respect. They are bonded to each other 
and each is bonded to three other H atoms. Therefore, the bond between them 
is purely covalent.167Chemistr yGrade9 Chemical Bonding
Provide the appropriate answer to the following questions.
1. Which of the following bonds is nonpolar covalent, which is polar covalent, 
and which is ionic? (a) the bond in CsCl, (b) the H-N bond in NH3, (c) the NN 
bond in H2NNH2.
2. Explain your answers to question number 1.
3. Explain why CO2 is non-polar whereas SO2 is polar covalent bond?Exercise 5.8
5.3.4 Coordinate Covalent Bond (Dative Bond) 
At the end of this section, you will be able to
defi	ne	coordinate	covalent	(dative)	bond;
elucidate the formation of a coordinate covalent bond using suitable examples.
Students, please form groups and discuss the following 
questions. Present your discussion points to the class.
1. The cost of a “doro wet” meal in a certain hotel is 80 
Birr. Person “A” has 200 Birr in his/her pocket and 
he/she bought three “doro wet” by sharing 40 Birr 
with his/her friends. The same day evening he/she 
met with his/her friend in the evening and wanted 
to eat dinner with him/her. Unfortunately, person 
“A” and his/her friend became hungry and wanted 
to eat dinner. Person “A”’s friend, however, had no 
money in his/her pocket. The only food they found 
in the restaurant was “Tibs” and costs 80 Birr. How 
could a person “A” and his/her friend eat dinner?
2. Is there another possible way for two atoms to f orm 
a covalent bond other than through the  equally 
sharing of electrons between two atoms? Explain 
how.Activity 5.9
In the previous sections, we have discussed ionic and covalent bonding. There is a 
third  possibility in which unstable atoms becomes stable and it is by sharing electrons. 
However, the sharing is only from one atom. A  coordinate covalent bond or sometimes 
known as a dative bond is a type of covalent bond where the electron pair is provided 168Chemistr yGrade9 Chemical Bonding
by only one of the bonded atoms but shared by both atoms after bond formation 
(Figure 5.13 ). The atoms are held together because both of the nuclei attract the 
electron pair in similar fashion to that of a covalent bond. Once the coordinate covalent 
bond is formed, it is impossible to distinguish the origin of the electrons. There are two 
necessary conditions for a coordinate covalent bond to take place:
i. One of the atoms must have a pair of electrons, in most cases lone pair electrons. 
Examples of such molecules include H2O, NH3, and H2S.
ii. The other atom must have an empty space in its valence shell in order to accept 
a pair of electrons. Examples of such molecules include BF3, AlCl3, and H+. 
Pair of valance electrons 
available for bondingSharing of valance electrons 
coming from atom 1
Covalent molecule 
(Coordinate covalent bond)Atom 2
(Electron acceptor)Atom 1
(Electron donor)
Figure 5.13  Atomic diagram that shows the formation of coordinate covalent bond 
between atoms 1 and 2.
Consider the reaction between BF3 and NH3. As we have discussed previously, boron 
is	one	of	the	elements	that	become	stable	without	fulfi	lling	the	octet	rule.	In	BF3, the 
number of valence electrons of boron is only 6. Thus, boron has a space to hold two 
more electrons in its valence shell. On the other hand, in NH3, nitrogen has a lone 
pair	electronslone	pair	electron.	Although	boron	triﬂ	uoride	is	stable,	it	readily	forms	
a bond with ammonia. This reaction takes place in such a way that nitrogen shares its 
pair of electrons to boron forming a coordinate covalent bond as shown below. In this 
case, both boron and nitrogen share the shared electrons of nitrogen.
  
The second example of a coordinate covalent bond is the formation of ammonium 
ion from hydrogen ion (H+) and ammonia (NH3). The hydrogen ion has no electrons on 
its	valence	shell	and	can	accommodate	two	electrons	in	order	to	fulfi	l	the	duatduet	
rule. Ammonia shares its lone pair electrons to hydrogen ions and forms a coordinate 
covalent bond as shown below.
  
169Chemistr yGrade9 Chemical Bonding
The third example is the formation of  Al3Cl6. The bonding in aluminium chloride (AlCl3) 
is	essentially	covalent.	Each	aluminium	(Al)	atom	has	a	defi	cit	of	two	electrons	in	its	
valance shell, and chlorine (Cl) has a lone pair. Aluminium forms a coordinate covalent 
bond with the Cl atom on an adjacent AlCl3 group. As each of two aluminium atoms 
does this, then aluminium chloride is a covalent dimer molecule with the formula Al2Cl6.
  
Although the properties of a coordinate covalent bond do not differ from those of a
normal covalent bond (because all electrons are alike no matter what their source), 
the distinction is useful for keeping track of valence electrons.
Provide the appropriate answer to the following questions.
1. Show the formation of carbon monoxide (CO) using Lewis’s formula.
2. Explain the formation of hydronium ion (H3O+).Exercise 5.9
5.3.5 General Properties of Covalent Compounds 
At the end of this section, you will be able to
explain	the	general	properties	of	covalent	compounds;
investigate the properties of given samples of covalent compounds.
Students, please form groups and discuss on the 
following questions. Present your discussion points to 
the rest of the class, when asked by your teacher.
1. Consider the covalent molecule water and the ionic 
compound table salt. Compare them in terms of 
state, melting point, boiling point and conductivity 
of electricity.
2. Based on the above comparison, what general 
properties can you suggest about covalent 
compounds? Activity 5.10
In the previous sections, we have discussed that covalent compounds are formed by 
sharing electrons between two atoms. They have different physical and chemical 170Chemistr yGrade9 Chemical Bonding
properties compared to ionic compounds. In this section, we are going to discuss about 
the general properties of covalent compounds.
Physical Properties of Covalent Compounds
Covalent compounds form discrete molecules that can exist independently from each 
other in contrast to the crystal structure of ionic compounds in which formula units 
cannot exist individually but only as a part of a lattice of ions. Therefore, the physical 
properties of covalent molecules depend heavily on the nature of their interaction 
with other molecules (intermolecular forces). Depending on the nature of these 
intermolecular interactions, covalent compounds have the following properties.
a. At room temperature, most cov alent compounds are gases or liquids. Some covalent 
compounds are soft solids. The intermolecular force between most covalent 
molecules is the weak van der Waal’s force and will be discussed in grade 11.
b. Most covalent compounds have lo w melting and boiling points. The melting point 
and boiling point of substances are also dependent on the intermolecular forces 
between covalent molecules. Diamond is an exception. Its melting point is very high 
(about 4027 °C).
c. Most covalent compounds are poor conductors of electricity. This is because they 
cannot form ions in their solution form or molten state. Graphite, an allotrope 
of carbon, has covalent bonds and is an exception as it is a good conductor. 
Some covalent compounds like HCl that ionise in an aqueous solution are good 
conductors of electricity as well.
d. Most covalent comp ounds are soluble in non-polar solvents and are insoluble in 
polar solvents like water. The reason behind this is most covalent compounds are 
either non-polar or moderately polar. Water is a highly polar solvent and cannot 
dissolve non-polar or moderately polar covalent molecules. Few polar covalent 
compounds, however, dissolve in polar solvents such as methanol and ethanol. The 
principle “like dissolves like” works in the solubility of substances.
e. Reactions of covalent compounds are slow compared to that of ionic compounds. 
This is because of the existence of bond breaking in chemical reactions wherein 
breaking a covalent bond needs high energy. In reactions of ionic compounds, 
dissolution of ionic compounds releases ions relatively easily. Hence, a relatively 
fast reaction occurs.
f. The existence of a covalent compoun d in the liquid or gaseous state makes the 
number of molecules per unit volume less, thereby leading to low density.171Chemistr yGrade9 Chemical Bonding
Provide the appropriate answer to the following questions.
1. Describe the physical properties of covalent compounds.
2. Compare the physical properties of covalent compounds with ionic 
compounds.Exercise 5.10
Intermolecular forces and their relationship to the states of matter will be discussed 
in grade 11.
5.4   Metallic Bonding 
In the previous sections, we have discussed about the three types of bonding known 
as ionic, covalent and coordinate covalent. In ionic bonding, metals form a bond with 
non-metallic elements. In covalent bonding, non-metals share electrons. In coordinate 
covalent bonding, non-metallic elements share electrons but the sharing comes from 
one element. These, however, are not the only types of bonding atoms can form. 
There is a fourth type of bonding that occurs between metallic atoms. This bond unlike 
other types of bonds will only occur between atoms of the same element. This section, 
therefor, deals with the formation of metallic bonding and its properties.
5.4.1 Formation of Metallic Bond
At the end of this section, you will be able to discuss the formation of metallic bonds.
Students, please form groups and discuss the following 
questions. Present your discussion points to the rest of 
the class, when asked by your teacher.
1. Are there ionic molecules? Why?
2. Have you ever heard about metal molecules? Why?
3. Can two identical or different metal atoms form 
molecules?   Activity 5.11
A metal atom generally has either 1, 2, or 3 electrons in its valence shell. It can easily 
lose these electrons and gain stability in the course of a chemical reaction. Metals are 
thus highly electropositive in nature. These electrons lost by the metal are called free 
electrons .
In the early 1900s, Paul Drude came up with the “sea of electrons” metallic bonding
theory by modelling metals as a mixture of atomic cores and valence electrons. By 
atomic cores, he means positive nuclei and inner shell electrons. Metallic bonds occur 
among the same metal atoms. Ionic bonds join metals to non-metals, whereas metallic 172Chemistr yGrade9 Chemical Bonding
bonding joins a bulk of metal atoms. A sheet of aluminium foil and a copper wire are 
good examples where you can see metallic bonding in action.
Metals have high melting and boiling points suggesting the presence of strong attraction 
forces between the atoms. Even a soft metal like sodium melts at a considerably higher 
temperature (melting point 97.8°C) than the element (neon m.p. -248.6°C) which 
precedes	it	in	the	Periodic	Table.	Sodium	has	the	electronic	confi	guration	2,8,1.	When	
sodium atoms come together, the electron in the outermost shell of one sodium atom 
shares space with the equivalent valence electron on a neighbouring atom outermost 
shell, in much the same way that a covalent bond is formed. The difference between 
a covalent bond and the metallic bond in sodium atoms, however, is that each sodium 
atom is being touched by eight other sodium atoms and the sharing occurs between 
the central atom and the outermost shell on all of the eight other atoms. Each of these 
eight atoms, in turn, is being touched by eight sodium atoms, which in turn are touched 
by eight atoms and so on and so on, until all the atoms in that lump of sodium are 
taken. All of the outermost shells on all of the sodium atoms overlap to give a vast 
number of molecular shells that extend over the lamp of metal. 
The electrons freely move within these molecular outermost shells, and therefore 
each electron becomes detached from its parent atom. The electrons are said to be 
delocalized. The metal is held together by the strong forces of attraction between the 
positive nuclei and the delocalized electrons (Figure 5.14 ).
Figure 5.14  Metallic bonding: The Electron Sea Model: Positive atomic nuclei (orange 
circles) surrounded by a sea of delocalized electrons (yellow circles).
Such type of metallic bonding is sometimes described as “an array of positive ions in 
a sea of electrons”. Each positive centre in the diagram represents all the rest of the 
atom apart from the outer electron, but that electron has not been totally lost from the 
atoms. It may no longer have an attachment to a particular atom, but it’s still there in 
the structure. Sodium metal is therefore written as Na, not Na+.
Problem : Discus the metallic bonding in magnesium and explain why it has a higher 
melting point than sodium metal.173Chemistr yGrade9 Chemical Bonding
Strategy: Use the sea of electrons model to explain why magnesium has a higher 
melting point (650°C) than sodium (97.79°C).
Solution
Magnesium	has	the	electronic	confi	guration	2,	8,	2.	Both	of	the	valence	electrons	
become delocalized, so the “sea” has twice the electron density as it does in sodium. 
The remaining “ions” also have twice the charge and so there will be more and 
strong attraction between “ions” and “sea”. Each magnesium atom has 12 protons in 
the nucleus compared with sodium’s 11. In both magnesium and sodium, the nucleus 
is screened from the delocalized electrons by the same number (10) of electrons in 
the inner shells (2 + 8). This means that there will be a stronger attraction from the 
magnesium nucleus of 2+ than the sodium nucleus which has only a 1+ nucleus.
So, there will  be a greater number of delocalized electrons in magnesium which leads 
to a greater attraction by the magnesium nuclei. The smaller radius of magnesium 
atoms leads to stronger attractions of the delocalized electrons than sodium, as they 
are closer to the magnesium nuclei. Each magnesium atom also has a greater number 
(twelve) of near neighbours than sodium (eight). These factors, therefore, increase the 
strength of the bond still further in magnesium metal.
Transition metals tend to have particularly high melting points and boiling points. The 
reason is that they can involve more valence electrons in the delocalization. The more 
electrons you can involve, the stronger the attractions tend to be.
Provide the appropriate answer to the following questions.
1. Defi	ne	metallic	bond.
2. Discuss the metallic bond in aluminium metal. (Hint: one aluminium atom will 
be surrounded by 12 atoms).
3. Compare the metallic strength between magnesium and aluminium metals. 
Justify your answer.
4. Draw the electron sea model of magnesium metal.Exercise 5.11
5.4.2 Properties o f Metallic Bond
At the end of this section, you will be able to 
explain the electrical and thermal conductivity of metals in relation to metallic 
bonding;	
make a model to demonstrate metallic bonding.174Chemistr yGrade9 Chemical Bonding
Students, please form groups and discuss the 
following questions. Present your discussion points to 
the class.
1. Which of the following substances conduct 
electricity? Dry cloth, plastic, dry wood, a piece 
of metal.
2. Of the substances listed under question number 1, 
what is the reason that all except one substance 
do not conduct electricity?
3. Which of the substances mentioned under question 
number 1 is the hardest? Why?   Activity 5.12
Metals have several unique qualities, such as the ability to conduct electricity and 
heat. Metals have other bulk properties which will be discussed in grade 10.
Conducti vity
Since the electrons in metals are free to move between the positively charged “ions”, 
pushing electrons from an outside source into a metal wire at one end (Figure 5.15 ) 
would move the free electrons through the wire and come out at the other end at the 
same rate.  Such movement of charge is known as conductivity. These freely moving 
electrons transfer electric charge as well as heat across the metallic structure. This 
freedom of the valence electrons accounts for the high thermal conductivity in metals 
as well.   
Figure 5.15The	“sea	of	electrons”	is	free	to	ﬂ	ow	about	the	crystal	of	positive	metal	 ions. These 
ﬂ	owing	electrons	can	conduct	electrical	change	when	an	electric	fi	eld	is	applied	(e.g.,	a	battery).175Chemistr yGrade9 Chemical Bonding
Provide the appropriate answer to the following questions.
1. List the properties of metals.
2. What are the three factors that determine the strength of a metallic 
bond?
3. Why metals have high melting and boiling points compared to the non-
metals?Exercise 5.12
Key Terms
 Anion 
 Anode
 Bond polarity
 Boiling point
 Brittle
 Cation
 Cathode  
 Chemical bond
 Conductivity
 Covalent bond
 Covalent molecule  
 Coordinate covalent bond
 Diatomic molecule
 Dipole 
 Dot formula
 Double bond   
 Electronegativity 
 Homonuclear   
 Heteronuclear
 Immiscible liquids 
 Ion Ionic bond
 Ionic compound  
 Ionization            
 Ionization energy 
 Lewis formula
 Lone pair electron
 Melting point
 Metallic bond
 Monoatomic ion
 Multiple bond  
 Noble gases 
 Nonbonding electron 
 Nonpolar molecule
 Octet rule   
 Polar molecule
 Polyatomic molecule
 Polyatomic ion             
 Single bond    
 Triple bond    
 Unshared electron  
      
Unit Summary
In this unit, the association of the electrons and the properties of the elements in chemical 
bond formation are discussed thoroughly. Elements are distinguishable from each 
other due to their electrons. Because each element has a distinct number of electrons, 
this determines their chemical properties as well as the extent of their reactivity. In 
chemical bonding, only valence electrons are involved. This unit, therefore, dealt with 
the way how the different types of chemical bonds are formed, the properties of 
compounds formed in each type of chemical bonding, and the electron dot formulas 
or Lewis structures used to represent simple molecules or compounds formed in each 176Chemistr yGrade9 Chemical Bonding
type of chemical bonding, and the origin of polarity in molecules.
Except a few elements, the atoms of most of the elements have a characteristic 
tendency to combine and form molecules or compounds. The atoms that form the 
molecules are held together by attractive forces. A chemical bond  is, therefore, the 
force that holds atoms together to form molecules or compounds.
The American chemist Gilbert Lewis (1875-1946) used this observation to explain 
the types of ions and molecules that are formed by other elements.  He called his 
explanation the octet rule .  The octet rule states that atoms tend to form compounds in 
ways	that	give	them	eight	valence	electrons,	and	thus	the	electron	confi	guration	of	a	
noble gas. Most elements follow the octet rule in chemical bonding, which means that 
in order to become stable an element should have eight valence electrons in a bond 
or	exactly	fi	ll	up	its	valence	shell.
In the course of chemical bond formation, atoms attain octet by sharing, loosing, 
or gaining valence electrons. Metals tend to lose all their valence electrons while 
nonmetals eight gain or share some of their valence electrons.
Any atom or molecule with a net charge, either positive or negative, is known as an 
ion. Net electric charge of an ion is calculated as follows:
Net electric charge = number of protons – number of electrons
Anions are atoms or group of atoms having a net negative electric charge and cations 
are atoms or group of atoms having a net positive electric charge. Ions can be formed 
by ionization, which is the process of a neutral atom losing or gaining its valence 
electrons .
A bond formed by two oppositely charged ions due to electrostatic force is known 
as an ionic bond. The process of forming such a bond is called ionic bonding . As a 
general rule, ionic bond is formed between metallic and non-metallic elements.
To explain the various types of bonds  and to visualise the change in the valence 
electrons, the American physical chemist Gilbert N. Lewis (1916) proposed the Lewis 
dot formula. In the Lewis symbol for an atom, the chemical symbol of the element with 
their valence electrons is represented as dots surrounding it. The Lewis dot formula can 
also be represented using the atomic diagram.
The properties of ionic compounds depend on how strongly the cations and anions 
attract each other in an ionic bond. Ionic compounds exhibit the following properties: 
 They form crystals: the opposite charged ions in ionic compounds are held 
together very strongly by electrostatic force of attraction. Hence the ionic 
compounds are generally hard solids.
 They have high melting and high boiling points: considerable heat energy 
is required to separate the strong electrostatic attraction force between the 177Chemistr yGrade9 Chemical Bonding
positive and negative ions in ionic compounds.
 They are hard and brittle: ionic crystals are hard because the positive and 
negative ions are strongly held together by electrostatic attraction force.
 They are soluble in polar solvents: polar solvents dissolve polar compounds. A 
polar solvent is a type of solvent that has large partial charges or dielectric 
constant.
 They conduct electricity when they are dissolved in water or in a molten state: 
melting and dissolving ionic compounds makes cations and anions free to move.
 They have high density: the number of ions per unit volume in an ionic compound 
is high.
A covalent bond  consists of the simultaneous attraction of two nuclei for one or more 
pairs of electrons. In other words, a covalent bond is formed when two atoms share 
one or more electron pairs. Based on the number of pairs of shared electrons, the 
covalent	bonds	formed	can	be	classifi	ed	into	three:
 Single bond: one pair of electrons is shared 
 Double bond: share two pairs of electrons and 
 Triple bond: share three pairs of electrons
In a hetero nuclear molecule like HF, the shared electron pair between the two atoms 
gets	displaced	more	towards	ﬂ	uorine	since	the	electronegativity	of	ﬂ	uorine	is	far	
greater than that of hydrogen. The resultant covalent bond is a polar covalent 
bond. The molecule is termed as polar molecule. An ionic bond results when the 
electronegativity difference between the two bonding atoms is 2.0 or more. A polar 
covalent bond forms when the electronegativity difference between the atoms is in 
the range 0.5-2.0.
A coordinate covalent bond or sometimes known as a dative bond is a type of covalent 
bond where the electron pair is provided by only one of the bonded atoms but shared 
by both atoms after bond formation. Once the coordinate covalent bond is formed, it 
is impossible to distinguish the origin of the electrons. 
Depending on the nature of intermolecular interactions, covalent compounds have the 
following properties:
 At room temperature, most covalent compounds are gases or liquids
 Most covalent compounds have low melting and boiling points
 Most covalent compounds are poor conductors of electricity
 Most covalent compounds are soluble in non-polar solvents and are insoluble in 
polar solvents like water
 Reactions of covalent compounds are slow compared to that of ionic compounds
 The existence of a covalent compound in the liquid or gaseous state makes the 
number of molecules per unit volume less, thereby leading to low density
In the early 1900s, Paul Drude came up with the “sea of electrons” metallic bonding 
theory by modelling metals as a mixture of atomic cores and valence electrons. By 178Chemistr yGrade9 Chemical Bonding
atomic cores, he means positive nuclei and inner shell electrons. Metallic bonds occur 
among the same metal atoms. In metallic bonding the metal is held together by the 
strong forces of attraction between the positive core and the delocalized valence 
electrons of the metal. Metals have several unique qualities, such as the ability to 
conduct electricity and heat.
Review Exercise
Part I: Basic level questions.
Choose the correct answer for the following questions.
1. Which of the following does not contain ionic bonds?   
a. Sulfur dioxide
b. Sodium oxidec. Silicon dioxide
d. Silver oxide
2. Which of the substances has ions in its bonding model?
a. Copper
b. Carbon dioxidec. Copper oxide
d. Carbon
3. Which of the following is ionic compounds
a. HCl
b. NaClc. CO2
d. HBr
4. Which of the following doesn’t follow octet rule?
a. CH4
b. CCl4c. BCl3
d. CO2
5. Which of the following compounds contain hydrogen bonding?
a. H2O
b. NH3c. HF
d. CCl4
Part II: Intermediary level questions. 
Tell whether the following statements are true or false.
6. An Octet rule states that an element should have eight valence electrons in a 
bond	or	exactly	fi	ll	up	its	valence	shell.	
7. Many elements in the third-row and beyond have been observed to form 
compounds in which the central atom is surrounded by more than eight electrons. 
8. An ionic compound is denoted by writing its net negative charge in superscript 
immediately after the chemical structure for the atom/molecule. 
9. Ions can be formed by ionization, which is the process of a neutral atom losing 
or gaining electrons. 
10. As a general rule, ionic bond is formed between non-metallic elements. 
11. An ionic bond forms when the electronegativity difference between the two 
bonding atoms is less than 2.0. 
12. The properties of covalent compounds relate to how strongly the positive and 
negative ions attract each other in a covalent bond. 
13. Most of the ionic compounds are crystalline solids. 
14. Considerable heat energy is required to separate the strong electrostatic 
attraction force between the positive and negative ions in ionic compounds. 179Chemistr yGrade9 Chemical Bonding
15. The number of bonds that an atom can form can often be predicted from the 
number of electrons needed to reach an octet. 
16. A non-polar covalent bond forms when the electronegativity difference between 
the atoms is in the range of 0.5-2.0. 
17. Once the covalent bond is formed, it is possible to distinguish the origin of the 
electrons. 
Fill in the blank spaces.
18. There are two ways in which atoms can satisfy the octet rule.  One way is by 
_______________ their valence electrons with other atoms.  The second way is 
by _______________ valence electrons from one atom to another.
19. Losing, gaining or sharing of the valence electrons is always accompanied 
by_____________.
20. Atoms of ____________ tend to lose all of their valence electrons, which leave 
them with an octet from the next lowest principal energy level.
21. Any atom or molecule with a net charge, either positive or negative, is known as 
______________. 
22.  A bond formed by two oppositely charged ions due to electrostatic force is 
known as ______________.
23. In the ______________ for an atom, the chemical symbol of the element is 
written, and the valence electrons are represented as dots surrounding it.
24. Polar solvents dissolve polar compounds and non-polar solvents dissolve non-
polar compounds. This is commonly referred to as ____________.
25. Bonds sharing more than one pair of electrons are called _______________.
26. ______________ occur between identical atoms or between different atoms 
whose	difference	in	electronegativity	is	insuffi	cient	to	allow	the	transfer	of	
electrons to form ions.
27. Only atoms of the same element, which have the same electronegativity, can be 
joined by a ______________ bond.
28. A property that helps us distinguish a non-polar covalent bond from a polar 
covalent bond is __________________. 
29. When molecules share electrons equally in a covalent bond, there is no net 
electrical charge across the molecule. Such type of covalent molecule is known 
as _____________ molecule.
30. A ________________ is a type of covalent bond where the electron pair is 
provided by only one of the bonded atoms but shared by both atoms after bond 
formation. 
Part III: Challenge level questions
Give appropriate answers to the following questions.
31. How many types of chemical bonds are there? What are they?
32. Name one solvent in which most of the ionic compounds dissolve.
33. In which state do ionic compounds conduct electricity?180Chemistr yGrade9
34. Why do the nonpolar covalent compounds not conduct electricity?
35. What type of chemical bonds are found in each of the following compounds?
a. Potassium chloride 
b. Carbon dioxide
c. Hydrogen chloride
d. Water
e. Magnesium oxide
f. Calcium	ﬂ	uorideg. Methane 
h. Sodium chloride
i. Ammonia 
j. Phosphorus pentachloride
k. Sulphur hexachloride
36. In what type of solvents do the a) polar compounds and b) nonpolar compounds 
dissolve?
37. Why are molecules more stable than atoms?
38. What are the criteria due to which a covalent bond becomes polar or nonpolar?
39. Why are the partial positive and negative charge developed within a polar 
covalent molecule?
40. What is a coordinate covalent bond?
41. What are van der Waal’s forces of attraction?
42. Defi	ne	a)	polar	covalent	compound	and	b)	nonpolar	covalent	compound.
43. Give some examples in which coordinate covalent bond formation takes place.
44. Why do metals lustre?
45. Give some examples of the compounds where hydrogen bond exists.
46. Draw the Lewis dot formulae for the bond formations in the following compounds.
a. NaCl
b. CaF2
c. H2d. O2
e. N2
f. H2Og. NH3
h. CH4
47. What are the factors responsible for the formation of covalent bond and ionic 
bond? 
48. Why do the noble gases not take part in a chemical reaction?
49. What type of bond formation takes place between a) a metal and a nonmetal 
and b) two nonmetals?
50. Why do most of the ionic compounds exist in solid state while the covalent 
compounds are mostly in gaseous or liquid state? 
51. What	is	the	role	of	ionization	potential	and	electron	affi	nity	of	the	elements	in	
the formation of ionic bond and covalent bond? 
52. Why is the density of ionic compounds high and that of covalent compounds low?
53. Why are the melting points and boiling points of the ionic compounds high and 
those of covalent compounds low? 
54. Why do the pure covalent compound not conduct electricity? 
55. Why are the ionic compounds soluble in water? 
56. Why do polar covalent compounds dissolve in water? 
57. What types of bonds exist in the following ions? a) ammonium ion b) hydronium 
ion? 